The Project Gutenberg eBook, The New-Year's Bargain, by Susan Coolidge,
Illustrated by Addie Ledyard


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The New-Year's Bargain


Author: Susan Coolidge



Release Date: January 24, 2019  [eBook #58762]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NEW-YEAR'S BARGAIN***


E-text prepared by K Nordquist, Miller, Sue Clark, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 58762-h.htm or 58762-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/58762/58762-h/58762-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/58762/58762-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/newyearsbargain00cool





THE NEW-YEAR’S BARGAIN.


[Illustration: “There was only one body there,--an old, old man with
snow-white hair; but there was a long row of clay figures in front of
him.”]


THE NEW-YEAR’S BARGAIN.

by

SUSAN COOLIDGE.

With Illustrations by Addie Ledyard.


[Illustration]






Boston:
Roberts Brothers.
1884.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1871, by
Roberts Brothers,
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.

University Press: John Wilson & Son, Cambridge.




  A little golden head close to my knee,
  Sweet eyes of tender, gentianella blue
  Fixed upon mine, a little coaxing voice,--
                      Only we two.

  “Tell it again!” Insatiate demand!
  And like a toiling spider where I sat,
  I wove and spun the many-colored webs
                      Of this and that.

  Of Dotty Pringle sweeping out her hall;
  Of Greedy Bear; of Santa Claus the good;
  And how the little children met the Months
                      Within the wood.

  “Tell it again!” and though the sand-man came,
  Dropping his drowsy grains in each blue eye,
  “Tell it again! oh, just once more!” was still
                      The sleepy cry.

  My spring-time violet! early snatched away
  To fairer gardens all unknown to me,--
  Gardens of whose invisible, guarded gates
                      I have no key,--

  I weave my fancies now for other ears,--
  Thy sister-blossom’s, who beside me sits,
  Rosy, imperative, and quick to mark
                      My lagging wits.

  But still the stories bear thy name, are thine,
  Part of the sunshine of thy brief, sweet day,
  Though in _her_ little warm and living hands
                      This book I lay.




CONTENTS.


  CHAPTER                                     PAGE

     I. THE BARGAIN WITH THE MONTHS              5

    II. THE BEAR STORY                          19

   III. LITTLE TOT                              32

    IV. “MARIA”                                 44

     V. MAY’S GARDEN                            62

    VI. THE LITTLE HOUSEKEEPERS                 80

   VII. THE LAST OF THE FAIRIES                 98

  VIII. THE STORY OF A LITTLE SPARK            114

    IX. THE DESERT ISLAND                      129

     X. NIPPIE NUTCRACKER                      157

    XI. “CHUSEY”                               178

   XII. HOW THE CAT KEPT CHRISTMAS             199

        CONCLUSION.--WHAT WAS ON THE TREE      224




[Illustration: “This afternoon, in spite of the cold, they are out
gathering wood.”]




CHAPTER I.

THE BARGAIN WITH THE MONTHS.


It is a cold, wintry day. The Old Year is going to die to-night. All
the winds have come to his funeral, and, while waiting, are sky-larking
about the country. It is a very improper thing for mourners to do. Here
they are in the Black Forest, going on like a parcel of school-boys,
waltzing with leaves, singing in tree-tops, whooping, whistling, making
all sorts of odd noises. If the Old Year hears them, he must think he
has a very queer sort of “procession.”

Max and Thekla are used to the winds, and not afraid of them. They are
not afraid of the Forest either, though the country people avoid it,
and tell wonderful stories about things seen and heard there. The hut
in which they and their Grandfather live is in the heart of the wood.
No other house stands within miles of them. In summer-time the wild
lilies grow close to the door-step, and the fawns creep shyly out to
drink at the spring near by; and sometimes, when the wind blows hard
on winter nights, strange barkings can be heard in the distance, and
they know that the wolves are out. They do not tremble, though they are
but children. Max is eleven, very stout and strong for his age, and
able to chop and mark the wood for Grandfather, who for many years has
been Woodman. Thekla, who is nine, keeps the house in order, cooks,
mends clothes, and knits stockings like a little house-fairy. All
their lives they have lived here, and the lonely place is dear to them.
The squirrels in the wood are not more free and fearless than these
children, and they are so busy and healthy that the days fly fast.

This afternoon, in spite of the cold, they are out gathering wood,
of which the Ranger allows them all they need to use. There is a
pile at home already, almost as high as the cottage roof: but Thekla
is resolved that her fire shall always be bright when Max and the
Grandfather come in from out-doors, blue and cold; and she isn’t
satisfied yet. For hours they have been at work, and have tied ever so
many fagots. The merry winds have been helping in the task, tearing
boughs and twigs off overhead, and throwing them down upon the path, so
that the bundles have collected rapidly, and wise little Thekla says,
“This has been a good day.”

“I’m getting tired, though,” she goes on. “Let’s rest awhile, and take
a walk. We never came so far as this before, did we? I want to go up
that pretty path, and see where it comes out. Don’t you think we have
got wood enough, Max?”

Yes, Max thought they had. So hand in hand the children went along the
path. Every thing was new and strange. Into this part of the forest
they had never wandered before. The trees were thick. Bushes grew
below. Only the little foot-track broke the way. Thekla crept closer to
her brother as the walk grew wilder. A great forest is an awful sort of
place; most of all in winter, when the birds and squirrels are hushed
and the trees can be heard talking to one another. Sweet, curious
smells come from you know not where. The wind roars, and the boughs
creak back sharply as if the giants and dwarfs were quarreling. All is
strange and wonderful.

And now the bushes grow thinner. They were coming upon a little open
space fringed about with trees, and suddenly Thekla exclaimed, in an
astonished voice,--

“Why, Max! Look! There are people in there. I can see them through the
bushes!”

“People?” cried Max. “Stealing wood, no doubt. Quiet, Thekla! don’t
make any noise: we’ll creep up, and catch them at it. They shall see
what the Ranger says to such doings.”

So, like mice, they crept forward, and peeped through the screen of
boughs. But there was no sound of chopping, and nobody was meddling
with the wood. In fact, there was only one body visible,--an old, old
man with snow-white hair. But there was a long row of clay figures
in front of him, men and women as large as life; and they looked so
natural, it was no wonder Thekla had made the mistake. Some were
half-finished; some but just begun: one only seemed perfect,--the
figure of a beautiful youth, with a crescent moon on his cap; and, even
as they looked, the old man took a pinch of something, molded it with
his hand, and stuck it on the side of the head, from which it hung like
a graceful plume. Then he seemed satisfied, and began to work on one
of the others.

“How lovely! but did you ever see any thing so queer?” whispered
Thekla. “If we only dared go nearer!”

“Dared!” cried Max: “this is _our_ wood, and we have a right to go
where we like in it. Come on!” and he took Thekla’s hand, and drew her
boldly forward.

There were two great jars standing there, which seemed to hold the
stuff out of which the figures were made. The children peeped in.
One was full of a marvelous kind of water, sparkling and golden
and bubbling like wine. The other held sand, or what seemed like
sand,--fine, glittering particles,--most beautiful to see. It was
wonderful to watch the old man work. His lean fingers would twist and
mold the sand and water for a second, and there would be a lovely head,
an arm, or a garland of flowers. The forms grew like magic; and the
children were so charmed with watching, that they forgot either to
speak or to go away.

At last, the old man turned, and saw them. He didn’t smile, nor did he
seem angry. He only stood, and fixed his eyes upon them in silence.
Thekla began to tremble, but Max bravely addressed him:--

“What curious work this is you are doing!” he said. “Is it very hard?”

“I’m used to it,” was the brief reply.

“You have been doing it a long time perhaps,” said Thekla, shyly.

“Seven thousand years or so,” answered the old man.

“Why, what a story!” cried Max. “That’s impossible, you know: the world
wasn’t made as long ago as that.”

“Oh, yes! it was. You were not there at the time, and I was. I got
there about as soon as _it_ did, or a little before.”

“He’s certainly crazy,” whispered Thekla; “let’s run away.”

“Run away,” replied her brother, “from that old fellow? Why, he’s ten
times as old as Grandfather, and I’ll bet he’s not one quarter so
strong. There’s something very queer about it all, though, and I’m
bound to find it out. Would you dislike to tell us your name, sir?” he
asked politely.

“Oh, no!” answered the old man: “I haven’t the least objection. Most
people, however, don’t remember to inquire till they’re about seeing
the last of me. They mistake me for my brother, Eternity, I suppose. My
name is Old Time. That’s my scythe hanging on the tree. Don’t you see
it?”

There it was sure enough, only they had not noticed it before. “And
what are these beautiful figures?” asked little Thekla.

“Those are the Months,” replied Time. “I come here every year to renew
them. They get quite worn out, and need building up. It’s a nice dry
place, and they can stand till they are wanted. This one is January.
He’s finished; but I’m a little behind hand with the others.” As he
spoke, he turned again to his task.

“And what is this stuff you are making them of?” inquired Max, dipping
his finger in the sparkling liquid.

The old man fixed upon him a fiery eye. “Don’t meddle with that, boy!”
said he, in a severe tone: “nobody can touch those drops safely but
myself. That is water from the stream of Time.”

“And these?” asked Thekla, pointing to the second jar.

“Those are what you know as ‘moments,’” was the reply. “They are really
the dust of dead years, though somebody or other has given them the
name of ‘sands of Time.’ Pretty things they are, but they won’t keep.
Everybody in the world can have one at a time, but nobody can lay up a
stock for next day. I’m the only person to whom that is allowed.”

Just then a naughty idea entered into Max’s head. “We’ll see whether
that is true,” he muttered; and, watching till the old man’s back was
turned, he plunged his fingers into the jar, stole a double handful of
the sand, and hid it in the tin can which was slung to his side, and in
which his dinner and Thekla’s had been. Old Time was too busy to heed
him. Pretty soon after, Max took Thekla’s hand, and, without saying
“Good-by,” dragged her away down the narrow path towards home. It was
almost nightfall when at last they got there.

It was not till after supper when Grandfather had gone to bed that
Max confessed what he had done. Thekla felt dreadfully about it; but
he wouldn’t say he was sorry, and was sitting by the fire letting the
shining particles drift through his fingers, when suddenly voices were
heard out of doors as if a large company was approaching. He had just
time to hurry the can into a safe hiding-place when the latch rattled,
the door flew open, and in long procession streamed in the very figures
they had seen that afternoon in the wood.

No longer lifeless however, but angry, noisy, reproachful. “Ah, little
thief!” cried January. “Where are the stolen moments?”

“Yes,” shouted March, a blustering fellow with wild hair and eyes.
“Where’s the third finger of my left hand? Where are my Brother
February’s thumb-nail and right ear-tip?”

“And my roses,” wept June, a fair young woman. “See, I ought to have a
whole lap full, and there are only five. Oh, naughty, naughty boy!”

“And my holly sprig?” vociferated December. “Who’s to know which I am
without it? Not a child in the world will hang up his stocking at the
right time.”

“Didn’t you know,” sobbed April, “that the jar only held just enough to
make us complete, and no more? And here all of us but January are ugly,
maimed creatures, and the New Year will be so disgusted with us.”

It was too true. Every one lacked something. September had no
wheat-ears. May mourned over her want of violets. November raged up
and down, declaring that he _must_ have a turkey. “And what do you
think,” grumbled March, “the world is going to say, when we all come
in docked after this ridiculous fashion? The tides will be wrong and
the almanac-makers will tear their hair. The moon will go wandering
about like a lunatic. And all because a little boy in the Black Forest
couldn’t keep his hands out of what didn’t belong to him. Oh, fie! fie!
wait till my turn comes! won’t I blow you about!”

And the Months clustered about poor Max, scolding, threatening, crying,
till he didn’t know which way to look. He began to feel dreadfully
ashamed of himself, especially as Thekla was sobbing as loudly as
April, and imploring him to make amends. But he kept up a bold front.

“Ladies and gentlemen,” he said, “I think you’re very unreasonable.
Time belongs to us all. I never had so much to myself before, and I
mean to keep it unless you make it worth my while to give it up.”

“What shall we do?” cried July. “Shall we all make you a present? or
tell you a story?” said November.

“Or sing you a song?” chanted May.

“No music, thank you,” answered Max. “Little Thekla here sings to me,
and that is sweet enough. But if you each will make us a gift, and each
tell us a story, I will restore the sand you are making such a fuss
about. What do you say? Is it a bargain?”

“I won’t,” said January. “I’ll have nothing to do with it: I am
finished, and have no favors to ask of anybody.”

The others, however, all cried, “Yes!” And so the bargain was struck.
Each Month was to come in turn on the last night of the month before,
tell a story, bring a present, and get his missing moments. With this
agreement, they said good-by. April gave Thekla a kiss, and they went
away. For a time their voices could be heard growing more and more
distant in the forest, then all was silent again.

“Isn’t that splendid?” cried Max, exultingly.

“It’s very nice about the presents and stories,” answered Thekla; “but
I can’t help wishing you hadn’t taken the moments, Max. It’s dreadful
to think of your stealing any thing.”

“Pooh!” said Max: “it isn’t stealing to take _time_. Everybody does
that.”

[Illustration: “Where are the stolen moments?”]




CHAPTER II.

THE BEAR STORY.


It seemed a long month to Max and Thekla, but at last it was over. The
31st of January came. Grandfather was tucked up early in bed, the fire
was poked, the tin can brought out, and all made ready. The children
sat in expectation. At last there came a rap at the door.

“Walk in,” cried Max; and February entered. He was a short, thick-set
fellow, with red eyes, a red nose, and a gruff, surly voice. Very
unhappy he looked just now; and when Max pulled up a chair for him, he
sat down on the edge, and began,--

“Unaccustomed as I am to public speaking,”--

“Hallo!” cried Max, interrupting him. “That’ll never do in the world.
That’s a horrid beginning: you must try again.”

[Illustration: “The brothers and sister believed every word of it; but
Mamma put her tongue in her cheek, and gently pointed over her left
shoulder with her paw.”]

“Oh, must I?” said February, much relieved. “I thought I had to take
pains with my language. People who ‘address the young’ usually do.
Well, if I may go ahead in my own way it’s all right: you’ve taken a
weight off my mind.”

“I’m glad to hear it,” said Max; “but before you begin, where’s the
gift?”

“Here,” said February; and he pulled from his pocket something that
looked like a big icicle. It _was_ an icicle, only it didn’t melt in
your fingers or feel cold; and it had a delicious taste, like buckwheat
cakes, maple molasses, sausages, baked apples, turkey, cranberry sauce,
and nuts and raisins, all at once. Max broke it in two, and while
Thekla sucked one half and he the other, February began:--

“It’s only about the bears in the North-West Hollow.”

“Bears!” cried Max: “what bears?”

“A real nice family of bears who live up there. Last year when I saw
them, they were little fellows about the size of kittens; but they are
quite big now, and have got grown-up growls. I thought perhaps you’d
like to hear about ’em.”

Oh, wouldn’t they? Both children crept close to him, and drank in every
word with red cheeks and round eyes.

“Bears!” cried Max, quite stuttering with excitement. “I didn’t know
there were any in the Forest. Oh, do go on!”

“They used to lie all curled up in a heap,” continued February, “at
the bottom of a nest in the rocks, which their mother had lined with
leaves and moss to keep them warm. They looked just like funny bundles
of brown hair. There were four of them,--Snap, Snooze, Roll-about,
and Greedy. Roll-about was the fattest and the best-natured, but they
were all nice. They lay tangled together, and couldn’t help pulling
each other’s fur a good deal; but they quarrelled much less than most
brothers and sisters who live in such close quarters.

“I went away before they were old enough to go out, so I couldn’t
tell you much about them if it were not for April. April and I,” said
February, with a sentimental air, “were always great friends. She used
to see the Mamma Bear and her little ones go walking together. One day
when they were in the wood a barking of dogs and blowing of horns was
heard.

“‘Run! run!’ cried Mamma; and off they went,--all but Greedy who had
straggled away in pursuit of a honey-tree. He was too young to know how
to take care of himself, and getting confused ran into the very track
of the hunters. They would have killed him, but one shouted, ‘Take him
alive! take him alive! I want him;’ so instead they put him into a sack
and carried him away.

“Nothing more was heard of him for a long time. The others were sorry,
but they went prowling about all summer stuffing themselves with
good things, and did very well without him. By October they were as
fat as pigs. And all of a sudden one day, as they were lunching on
ground-nuts in a lonely place among the hills, as happy and friendly
as could be, they heard a scratching of claws, and smelt a fur which
seemed uncommonly familiar; and lo and behold! it was Greedy, back
again, as big as any of them, but not nearly so fat.

“Of course they growled with astonishment, and flew to meet him. He
was glad too, but his manner seemed a little cold. Where had he been?
Oh! he had been in a town of Germany getting his education. And where
had he been living? Oh! in the family of his tutor of course. Slept
in the same room with the children, and treated like a child. None of
them knew what a tutor might be; and Roll-about asked innocently if
it was something good to eat, but Greedy shook his head. The town was
a college town, he said. All persons of refinement were sent there to
study.

“‘Are you a person of refinement, Greedy?’ asked little Snooze.

“Greedy froze him with a look. He didn’t answer, but went on with his
tale. He had learned to dance. He could pick out the Ace of Hearts, and
A, B, and Z from the alphabet. He could jump over a stick. This last he
did on the spot, to show them how it went; and, in the middle of the
jump, Snap noticed something which made him cry out, ‘O Greedy! your
poor paws! What is the matter with them? They’re all brown, and dried
up?’

“Greedy looked foolish. ‘Oh!’ he replied, ‘that’s nothing:
they--they--got a little burnt one day,--that’s all,--on some hot iron.
Stoves are very hot in Germany.’

“Mamma looked queer when she heard this, and relieved her feelings by a
low growl. The little ones could not tell what to make of it.

“When asked how he managed to get back, Greedy explained it in this
way: ‘He was travelling,’ he said, ‘with some friends. They were in a
cage together, which was the fashionable way of going about just now.
By an accident, the cage upset and some of the bars broke; and, as it
was so near home, Greedy thought he might as well run over, and make
them a visit.’ All this he said with a lofty air, and the brothers
and sister believed every word of it; but Mamma put her tongue in her
cheek, and gently pointed over her left shoulder with her paw.

“They had a grand walk home; but no sooner had they got there, than
Greedy began to find fault with every thing in the most unpleasant
manner. The Hollow was the dampest hole he ever had seen. No place was
fit to live in without a stove. As for the food, it was horrid. It gave
him the stomach-ache, he declared; and he called for beef-steaks, as if
he expected a butcher to appear round the corner. When the honeycomb
was brought in, he fell upon it tooth and nail, and ate a great deal
more than his share. Mamma reproved him; but he snubbed her, and said
that was the way all the children did in the city; and when poor little
Roll-about, who had to go without any, gave a low whine or two just to
comfort herself, he boxed her ears with his paw savagely, and then
excused himself by telling them that Master Jack, his tutor’s son,
often cuffed his sister, Miss Gretchen, in that way, and nobody took
any notice. It wasn’t any particular consolation to Roll-about to hear
of it, and she crept away into a lonely corner, and moaned and licked
her paws for a long time.

“Master Jack and Miss Gretchen,”--how the Bear family did learn to
hate those children! Every rude and disagreeable thing Greedy did, he
quoted them as examples. Jack, it seemed, said, ‘I won’t,’ and fought
for his dinner; and Gretchen scratched and bit right and left; and they
quarrelled with each other. Their evil example had ruined all that
was good in poor Greedy. He said the most unpleasant things. He found
fault with every thing. He pitched into the others on all occasions,
and boxed Roll-about’s ears till the hair grew quite thin. Then he
advised her to use ‘bears’ grease.’ ‘All the city young ladies did so,’
he said; but what good was that, when the poor little thing could get
none but her own,--or his, which, as you may suppose, he wasn’t very
likely to offer her!

“‘Oh,’ Mrs. Bear used to say to herself, ‘if I only had Master Jack
and Miss Gretchen here, wouldn’t I give them a lesson?’ And as Greedy,
for all his fault-finding, had such a big appetite, that provisions
were growing scarce, two or three bad children, needing to be eaten by
way of example, _would_ have been convenient. Every thing went wrong
in the once happy home. The brothers and sisters were always sulking
in corners, and complaining to each other in low growls of the way
in which Greedy had treated them. Roll-about lost her plump sides,
and grew thin. Snap was finding out the advantages of bad temper, and
beginning to carry on like Greedy. At last Mrs. Bear declared she would
stand it no longer.

“‘You are grown up,’ she said: ‘go out and shift for yourself. As long
as you were good and content, I was glad to have you here: now you
only make my life miserable, and I can’t endure it.’ And she raised her
large paw, and showed her teeth, for the first time in her life; and
Greedy, with a snarl of fright, slunk away from the den.

“Out of her sight, however, his temper revived. He got into a great
huff. ‘Leave the den?’ Of course he would, and very glad to see the
last of it. So he went and chose a hole for himself to live in. It was
quite close to the village,--a great deal too close for safety. But the
silly creature had lost all his instinct by living with human beings.
And whenever the bells rang or any thing seemed to be going on, he
would rush out to peep, and find what it was. I only wonder they didn’t
catch him long ago.”

“Did they catch him, then?” asked Max.

“You shall hear. Only yesterday it was that a caravan with a band of
music came into the village. Greedy heard the sounds, and it seemed as
if he would go wild. He dodged among the bushes, and looked on as long
as he could stand it, and then, seized with a desire to distinguish
himself, out he came. The circus people couldn’t believe their eyes
when they saw him prancing after them, his head on one side, and taking
steps like a dancing-master. Of course such a prize was not to be
resisted. They lost no time; and, when I caught sight of them, poor
Greedy had already a muzzle on his jaws and a rope round his neck. A
boy was banging his sides with a stick, his tail was between his legs,
and I must say,” ended February, laughing heartily, “he didn’t look
particularly happy at being taken back into fashionable life after this
manner.”

“That’s first-rate,” cried Max, in fits of amusement.

“I’m so glad you liked it,” replied February, much pleased. “Now I’ll
trouble you for my thumb-nail and left ear-tip.”

The can was brought, and Max carefully measured out what was wanted.
February kissed Thekla’s hand (the tip of his nose felt _very_ cold),
made a clumsy bow to both, and went away.

The children hugged each other. “If they’re all like that,” cried they,
“how jolly it will be!”

[Illustration: GREEDY.]




CHAPTER III.

LITTLE TOT.


February went by like a flash, or the children thought so. It was
really a short month: but, besides, they were very busy; and work, you
know, makes time fly. Thekla, who had just learned to spin, had a
job on hand of which she was proud. It was no less than spinning and
carding the wool for a bran-new suit of clothes which Max was to wear
next year. Dyed brown, and woven by Mother Gretel the cunning weaver,
they were to be something grand. As for Max, his work was wood-carving.
Nearly all the German boys can carve; and he and Thekla thought the
spoon over which he was so busy, and which had grape leaves and
tendrils on the handle, most beautiful. It would go to the great Spring
Fair, and fetch a large price, perhaps as much as a silver dollar.
Altogether, they could hardly believe the calendar when it showed
them a month had gone by, and that evening they must look for another
visitor.

[Illustration: “Then the Tot said, ‘Budda hundry.’”]

It was a dark night, and very cold. As they sat by the fire waiting,
they could hear the frost cracking and snapping the tree-boughs. Now
and then a crash like thunder came. It was a limb, overloaded with ice,
breaking off, and falling to the ground. And by and by, among the
other noises, a strange, wild voice began to mingle, making them all
more fearful. It was March, who, as he came through the forest, was
talking to himself.

“Blow, blow!” he was saying. “I’m coming on to blow. Rock, rock!
There’d better be no babies in _my_ tree-tops. To and fro, to and fro,
roots and trunks alike, and the very stones must laugh and roll if I
choose to tickle them.” And then he gave a loud thump at the door, and,
without waiting answer, banged it open and marched in. He looked so big
and fierce and stormy that Thekla shrank back, without daring to push
forward a stool for him to sit upon; and even Max, who had pluck enough
for ten boys, felt afraid.

“Won’t you sit down, sir?” he said at last very meekly, and went to
shut the door, which March had left open. Quite a little heap of dead
leaves and snow had collected on the sill; and Thekla, who was a born
housewife, ran to brush them up. March twirled round on his stool, and
watched her proceedings with great scorn.

“Sweep!” he said in a voice like a big wind. “You call _that_ sweeping?
You should see me when I get at it. I scoop up all the leaves in the
world at once, and send them spinning. Whole snow-storms go into my
dust-pan. Ho! ho!”

“But I am so little,” replied Thekla, in her bird’s voice; “and,
beside, I have brushed up all there are.”

“All there are? Nonsense,” cried March; “but no matter. Am I, or am
I not to tell a story? If not, let me know at once; for I have an
engagement with a couple of hurricanes, and want to be off. A pretty
business,” he went on, glaring fiercely, “to sit here by this melting
fire to amuse a couple of thieving brats, when I have so much to do.
Ho! ho!”

“Oh!” whispered Thekla to Max, “let’s give him his moments, and let him
go: he makes me afraid.”

“Not I,” said Max, who was plucking up courage, “not if I know it!--Of
course you are to tell a story,” he continued aloud: “you promised, and
you ought to be a Month of your word. Thekla, put away that broom. Now
we’re all ready, sir.”

March scowled, but made no resistance. As Max had said, he was a Month
of his word; and he began in a queer voice, which was now loud and then
soft, now dying away to a murmur and then bellowing out again in a way
that made you jump.

“Once upon a time, as I was driving across a prairie, I saw a house.”

“I don’t know what a prairie is,” said Thekla, gently.

“I don’t suppose you do,” growled March: “that’s one of the things you
don’t know, and there are a good many more of ’em. A prairie’s a big
field without any fences, and several thousand miles square. People
live there,--some people do: I spend a good deal of time there myself.
First-rate place for a promenade,--no corners to turn, plenty of room.
As I said, I saw a house.

“There was a snow-storm along with me. We had nine hundred billion
horses, all white as wool; and we went fast. Killing pace. Horses kept
dropping down dead, lay in heaps wherever we went; and we left ’em
there. About four million dashed up against the house I was telling
you about. They ’most covered it up, for it wasn’t a big house. There
were two little windows and a door. Windows had curtains; but one was
slipped aside, and the fire looked out like a red eye. I didn’t like
that; so I put my eye to the other side, to see if I couldn’t look him
down.

“Funniest thing I ever saw!” said March, giving a hoarse chuckle. “Such
tots! Biggest only four years old; t’other not a year. There was a
pussy too. They three--true, on my word--were the only creatures in the
house that night.”

“Where could their father and mother be?” asked Max, excessively
interested.

“Oh! went off that morning to the town,--like fools,--and couldn’t get
back. We saw to that. Stuck in ten drifts, most frozen to death. Wife
half-crazy about the babies; husband just managed to get to shelter.
Ho! ho!” cried March. “Served ’em right, I say. Ho! ho!

“Don’t you think, that Tot, the biggest one, was putting a stick of
wood on the fire when I looked in? Stick as big as she was, almost! How
she did it was a mystery. Little apron blew into the flame, but I flew
up the chimney and blew it the other way. ’Tisn’t often I do a good
turn, but I couldn’t help it then.”

“That was right,” said Thekla.

“Hold your tongue!” cried March, rudely. “What do you know about it?
Two sticks that little thing got on. I never did! How she managed it,
and such a baby!

“Then she put a shawl over the other tot. Patted the corners down
just like an old woman, and put one on herself. Hind side before,
but no matter for that. Then she got into bed, and sang, ‘Hush by,
Budda,--hus’ by, Budda,’ till the baby went to sleep. Then she went to
sleep too. I thought I’d like to see what would happen when they woke
up, so I sent the snow-storm on and stayed behind with my eye to the
chink.

“I’m not a tender-hearted person myself,” said March, modestly,
“but really I couldn’t bear to disturb those children. Several
times I wanted to roar dreadfully,--roaring is one of my greatest
pleasures,--but I didn’t. I never quite knew why, but so it was. The
snow isn’t noisy, so it was as still all night about the little house
as if it had been mid-summer.

“I watched, and the children slept. By and by when morning came, the
baby woke up and began to cry. The Tot patted him and said, ‘Hush-a-by,
Budda,’ a great many times; but he wouldn’t stop. Babies don’t stop,”
added March, reflectively, “as a general thing. Then the Tot said,
‘Budda hundry;’ and she got up, and tugged and tugged to put a stick on
the fire, and fetched a tin cup and spoon, and set them on a chair by
the table where there was a milk-pan. She had to tip it with her little
hands, and a great deal spilled on the floor and a great deal on her
apron, but some went in the cup. She began to cry at first; then she
said, ‘Mamie didn’t mean to,’ and brightened up again. And she warmed
the milk and fed that baby like a woman,” cried March, giving his knee
a great slap. “I _never_ did! Baby ate it all, and went to sleep again.
Tot drank some too, but not much. Wanted to save it for the baby, I
guess.

“It was a very cold day. I kept in a long time; but at last I _had_ to
howl or I should have burst. Tot got frightened. She said her little
prayers, and hid her head under the pillow; but when the other cried,
she stopped, and gave him some milk, and sang, ‘Hush by, Budda,’ till
he went off again. I tell you what,” said March, “I did feel sorry for
that child.

“There was only one stick of wood left, and that was a big one. Tot
couldn’t move it. Pussy got on the table, and lapped up all the milk
in the pan. Then Tot cried hard, and said, ‘Mamma, come! oh do come!’
over and over. She put all the clothes there were on the bed. When
the baby cried, she patted him with her little hand, and cried too.
When morning came, they were both still. I could see them through the
window. Away off on the prairie I heard the slow jingle of a bell.

“‘Hurry! hurry!’ I roared, ‘or you’ll be too late.’ Then I scooped
up the snow, and blew open a path. The sleigh got nearer. The woman
couldn’t wait. She held out her arms to the cottage. At last she jumped
into the snow (it was up to her waist), and floundered to the door. She
beat upon it, threw it open, and cried out, ‘Mary! baby! O my baby!’

“They lay in the bed; but no little voices answered. The mother gave a
loud scream. ‘Oh, they are dead!’ she shrieked, and flung herself over
them.

“The men ran in. There were four of them. They built a fire and warmed
blankets, and put hot milk into the mouths of the little ones.

“‘This little fellow isn’t dead,’ said one of them. He wasn’t. Pretty
soon he opened his eyes, and when he saw his mother he began to cry.
Tot had wrapped him up so warm that the cold didn’t kill him,--only
made him dull.

“It took longer to bring her round, but at last they did. And the first
thing she said was, ‘Mamie didn’t mean to spill the milk.’

“I declare,” said March with a frog in his throat, “I never did see the
beat of that child.”

“And is that the end?” asked Thekla, who had been quietly crying for
some time past over little Tot’s troubles.

“Of course it’s the end,” replied March. “What did you expect? And a
very nice story it is, though I say it as shouldn’t.

“And now I’m off,” shouted he, and made a rush for the door.

“One minute!” cried Max: “you’ve forgotten something. Here’s your
moments, you know. And then there is the present you were to give us:
don’t leave that out.”

“I’m glad you reminded me,” said March,--“very glad indeed.” His wild
eyes sparkled with a fierce light which was ugly to see. With one hand
he seized his “moments,” the other was fumbling in his pocket.

“Here it is!” he cried, and flung something in their faces. Another
instant he had banged the door and was gone. They could hear him
roaring and whooping as he went.

The poor children--all red in the face, sneezing, coughing--looked at
each other.

“Ow! ow!” cried Max.

“Thzs! thzs!” responded Thekla.

March’s present was a bad cold in the head!

[Illustration: LITTLE TOT AND THE BABY ASLEEP.]




CHAPTER IV.

“MARIA.”


Such colds! Never was any thing like them. Day after day Max sat by
the fire with a splitting headache, cold chills running down his back;
while night after night Thekla awoke, coughing and choking from a spot
in her throat which burned like a live coal. I can tell you, when March
gives a present he does it in real earnest.

[Illustration: “One day in an old garret I found the doll, who, as I
said, was living in a closet.”]

They were so miserable you might have thought that even March must pity
them a little. But he didn’t,--not a bit. As he told the children, he
was any thing but a “tender-hearted person.” When they were at the very
worst, they could hear him astride the roof, roaring and whooping down
the chimney in the most unfeeling way; and he regularly banged the door
open on cold nights to let the wind in; so that, at last, Max never
thought of sitting down to supper without first putting a heavy chair
against it to keep it shut. So blustering and ill-tempered a Month was
never known. But at last his turn came to go; and, by that time, what
with patience and catnip tea the children had begun to get better.

There is a great difference, however, between being _better_ and
being well. Thekla’s hands were still too weak and thin to twirl the
spindle, and for many a day the wood-carving had lain untouched in the
cupboard. It seemed as if they were too languid to enjoy any thing;
and, when the evening came for April’s visit, Max would hardly take the
trouble to rise and fetch the can, though Thekla reminded him. After it
was brought out, however, and the fire poked into a blaze, they felt
a little brighter. Poor things, it was a long time since any thing
pleasant had happened to them!

The night was still. The noisy winds had fallen asleep, so that you
could hear the least sounds far away in the forest. By and by light
footsteps became audible, drawing nearer; and Max had time to run for a
chair and place it in the cosiest corner, before a soft tap fell upon
the door.

“May I come in?” said a voice, very gently and politely. How different
from rude March!

This was April. She looked very young and small; and, as Thekla went
forward to greet her, she felt as if it were some little visitor of her
own age come to tea. It was with a sense of protection and hospitality
that she took from her hand a great bundle, which seemed heavy. April
sat down, and then she put her arm round Thekla’s waist and pulled her
nearer, bundle and all. She had an odd, pretty face when you came to
look at it. The lips laughed of themselves; but the eyes, which were
blue and misty, seemed to have tears behind them all ready to fall. Or
if, as sometimes happened, the lips took a fancy to pout, then the eyes
had their turn, and brightened and twinkled so that you could not help
smiling. It would have puzzled anybody whether to call the countenance
most sad or most merry. April’s hair was all wavy and blowsy, as if
she had been out in a gale of wind. Two or three violets were stuck
in it; and the voice with which she spoke sounded like the tinkle of
rain-drops on the leaves.

“Look,” she said, “what I have brought you!” and she unfastened the
bundle, which was pinned together with a long red thorn.

O mercy! It seemed as if the sun, which went to bed three hours ago,
had got up again, and was pouring over April’s lap on to the kitchen
floor. For there lay a great heap of dandelions, golden and splendid,
which perked up their heads, and laughed and winked on all around. The
whole room seemed to brighten from their glorious color. And, what
was funny, these dandelions had voices, as it seemed; for out of the
middle of the heap came queer sounds of peeping and chirping, which the
children could not at all understand.

April laughed. She parted the flowers, and there were two little
new-born chicks, as yellow as the yolk of an egg. They were soft and
downy; and their cunning black eyes and little beaks gave them a
knowing look, which was astonishing, when you recollected how short a
time they had been in the world. “Cheep! cheep!” they cried, and one
ran directly into Thekla’s outstretched hands. The warm fingers felt to
it like a nest; and the little creature cuddled down contentedly, with
a soft note which expressed comfort. The other, April handed to Max.

“They are for you,” she said. “If you like them and take care of them,
you may have a whole poultry-yard some day. My broods are not always
lucky; but these will be.”

“Like them,” indeed! You should have seen the happy fuss which went on
over the new pets. Max ran for a basket; Thekla brought flannel to line
it, and meal and water; and the chicks were kissed, fed, and tucked
away as if they had been babies. By and by they fell fast asleep under
their warm coverlet; and then the children went back to the fire, and,
while Max made ringlets of the dandelion-stalks and stuck them in
Thekla’s hair, April began:--

“My story isn’t much,” she said. “I’ve told so many in the course of
my life that I’m quite exhausted, for I make it a rule never to tell
the same twice. Some are so sad that it makes me cry merely to think
of them,”--and as she said this April’s tears suddenly rained down her
face,--“and others so jolly that I should split my sides if I tried.”
Here April giggled like a school-girl, and her eyes seemed to send out
rays of sun which danced on the wet tear-stains. “So it must always
be new,” she went on; “and, ever since I saw you, I’ve been trying to
decide what it should be. There _was_ a delightful one about ducklings
which I thought of,--but no!” and she solemnly shook her head.

“Oh, why not? Do, pray do!” cried Max.

“Couldn’t,” said April. “That story--the first half of it at least--I
told to a little girl in England last year. I didn’t finish because
something came along and set me crying, but half is just as bad as the
whole. I couldn’t tell that again. Don’t look so disappointed, though!
I’ve got one for you; and, though it isn’t one of my best, I dare say
you’ll like it well enough. It’s about a doll.”

“A doll! Pshaw!” said Max, impolitely.

“Why, what a rude boy you are!” cried April, beginning to sob. “I
declare, I ne--never was t--treated so before.”

“Max!” exclaimed Thekla, “how could you? You’ve hurt her feelings.
Don’t cry any more, dear,” she went on,--for somehow Thekla felt older
and bigger than this fascinating little maiden who laughed and cried by
turns,--“he didn’t mean to. He is a real kind boy, only sometimes he
speaks before he thinks. And I like dolls--oh, so much!”

“Do you?” said April, brightening. “Then it’s all right. As for you,”
she added, turning sharply round on Max, “you can go out and sit on the
steps, if you don’t want to hear it.”

“Oh!” stammered Max, dreadfully ashamed of himself, “I do. I’d just as
lief hear it as not. And I beg your pardon, if I spoke rudely.”

“Very well then,” said April, pacified. “If you feel that way, I’ll
proceed. This doll lived in a closet. I should never have come across
her probably if it hadn’t been for the house-cleaning.

“You must know that there are countries in the world where every spring
and fall the houses are all turned upside down and inside out, and
then downside up and outside in, all for the sake of being clean. The
women do it. What becomes of the men I don’t know: they climb trees
or something to be out of the way, I suppose. I like these times, of
all things. I like to swing the heavy carpets to and fro on the lines,
and flap the maids’ aprons into their faces as they stand on the ledge
outside to wash the windows. It is great fun. And I love to creep into
holes and corners, and rummage and poke about to see what folks have
got. And one day, when doing this in an old garret, I found the doll,
who, as I said, was living in a closet. They had put her there to be
out of the way of the cleaning.

“Her name was Maria. She was big, but not very beautiful. Her head was
dented, and there were marks of finger-nails on her cheeks, which were
faded and of a purplish-pink. But her arms and legs were bran new, and
white as snow, and her body was round and full of sawdust. I couldn’t
understand this at all until she explained it. Her head, it seemed,
was twenty-five years old; and her body had only been in the world six
weeks!

“Once, she said, she had possessed a body just the same age as her
head, and then she belonged to a person she called ‘Baby May.’ Baby
May used to bump her on the floor, and dig the soft wax out of her
cheeks with her nails. This treatment soon ruined her good looks; and
when she mentioned this, Maria almost cried,--but not quite, because,
as she said, years had taught her self-command. I don’t know what
she meant,” added April, reflectively. “I’m sure years never taught
_me_ any thing of the sort. However, that is neither here nor there!
If she hadn’t had a fine constitution, Maria never could have endured
all this cruelty. Her body didn’t. It soon sank under its sufferings;
and, after spitting sawdust for some months, wasted away so much that
May’s mother said it must go into the ragbag. People make a great fuss
about having their heads cut off, but Maria said it was quite easy if
the scissors were sharp. Snip, snip, rip, rip, and there you are. The
head was put carefully away in a wardrobe because it was so handsome,
and May’s mamma promised to buy a new body for it; but somehow she
forgot, and by and by May grew so big that she didn’t care to play
with dolls any more. So Maria’s head went on living in the wardrobe.
Having no longer any cares of the body to disturb it, it gave itself
up to the cultivation of the intellect. A wardrobe is a capital place
for study, it appears. People keep their best things there, and rarely
come to disturb them. At night, when the house is asleep, they wake up
and talk together, and tell secrets. The silk gowns converse about the
fine parties they have gone to, and the sights they have seen. There
were several silk gowns in the wardrobe. One of them had a large spot
of ice-cream on its front breadth. She used to let the other things
smell it, that they might know what luxury was like; and once Maria got
a chance, and licked it with her tongue, but she said it didn’t taste
as she expected. There was an India shawl, too, which would lift the
lid of its box, and relate stories--oh, so interesting!--about black
faces and white turbans and hot sunshine. The laces in the drawer
came from Belgium. That was a place to learn geography! And the Roman
pearls had a history too. They were devout Catholics, and would tell
their beads all night if nobody seemed to be listening. But the Coral
in the drawer below was Red Republican in its opinions, and made no
attempt to hide it. Both hailed from Italy, but they were always
quarrelling! Oh, Maria knew a deal! As she grew wise, she ceased to
care for tea-parties, and being taken out to walk as formerly. All she
wanted was to gain information, and strengthen her mind. At least so
she said; but for all that,” remarked April, with a sly smile, “she had
some lingering regard for looks still, for she complained bitterly of
the change in her complexion. Perhaps it was putting so much inside her
head made the outside so dull and shabby!

“Well, for twenty-three long years Maria lived in the wardrobe at the
head of polite society. She was treated with great respect. The dresses
always bowed to her when they went in and out. When their time came for
being ripped up and pieced into bedquilts, they said farewell with many
tears. All this gratified her feelings, of course. So you can imagine
what a shock it was when, one day, the wardrobe door was suddenly
opened, and she was lifted down and laid in a pair of little clutching
hands, which grasped her eagerly. A small thumb-nail pierced her left
cheek. ‘I could have screamed,’ said Maria; ‘but where would have been
the use? Dolls have positively _no_ rights.’”

“Who was it took her down?” asked Max, quite forgetful of his original
scorn about Maria’s history.

“It was Baby May. Not the same May, but another as like her as two
peas. In fact, the first May was grown up; and this was her little
girl. Grandmamma had bought a beautiful new body, and now Maria’s head
had to be sewed on to it. Her feelings when the stitches were put in,
she said, she could never describe. They were like those of a poor old
soldier, who, after living fifty years on his pension, finds himself
dragged from pipe and chimney-corner, and obliged to begin again as a
drummer-boy.”

“It was really cruel, I think,” said Thekla, indignantly.

“Yes,” said April; “but you haven’t heard the worst. Think of being
suddenly united to such a young body! There was Maria, elderly and
dignified, full of wisdom and experience, longing for nothing so much
as to be left alone to think over the facts she had learned. And there
were her arms and legs always wanting to be in motion. New, impulsive,
full of sawdust, it was misery to them to be still. They wanted to
dance and frisk all the time, to wear fine clothes, to have other dolls
come on visits, to drink tea out of the baby-house tea-set, and have
a good time generally. When Maria assured them that she was tired of
these things, and had seen the vanity of them, they said they wanted to
see the vanity too! And if ever she got a quiet chance, and had fallen
into a reverie about old times and friends,--the silk stockings in the
wardrobe, for instance, and the touching story they had told her; or
the shoe-buckles, who were exiles from their country,--all of a sudden
her obstreperous limbs would assert themselves, out would flourish her
legs, up fly her hands and hit her in the eye, and the first thing she
knew she would be tumbled out on to the floor. Just think what a trial
to a lady of fine education and manners! It was enough to vex a saint.
She assured me she had lost at least three scruples of wax. But nobody
cared in the least about her scruples.”

“And what became of the poor thing in the end?” asked Thekla.

“That I can’t say,” replied April: “I had to come away, you know; and
I left her there. One of two things, she told me, was pretty sure to
happen: either her arms and legs would sober with time, or she would
get so hideous from unhappiness that May’s mamma would buy a new head
to match them. ‘Then, ah then!’ said she, ‘I may perhaps be allowed
to go back to my beloved top-shelf in the wardrobe. Never, never will
I quit it again so long as I live!’ She ended with a sigh. I bade her
farewell, but on the way downstairs I met a little girl coming up and
calling out, ‘Where dolly? me want dolly!’ And I fear poor Maria was
not left any longer in peace in the attic closet.”

April closed her story. She took her moments from the can, poured the
dandelions into Thekla’s lap, and rose to go.

“I am late,” she said: “all my violets must be made before midnight. I
have none but these few in my hair.”

“Not yet.--stay a little longer!” pleaded the children.

“Ah, no!” said April: “I must go. You won’t miss me long: May is
coming, my sister May. Everybody loves her better than they do me,” and
she wiped her eyes dolefully as she shut the door.

“What a goose I am!” she cried, flinging it open again, with a merry
laugh. “Don’t mind my nonsense. Good-by, dears,--good-by!”

Oh, how cheerful the kitchen seemed now! Where were the colds and the
disconsolate looks? All gone; and Max and Thekla laughed gayly into
each other’s faces.

“I’ll tell you what,” said Max, “if April didn’t cry so easily, she’d
be one of the jolliest girls in the world.”

[Illustration: “Good-by, dears!”]




CHAPTER V.

MAY’S GARDEN.


The chicks throve. Day by day their legs grew strong, their yellow
bodies round and full, and their calls for food more clamorous. As the
snow melted, and the sun made warm spots on the earth, they began to
run from the cottage-door, and poke and scratch about with their bills.
But they always came back to the basket to sleep; and Thekla prepared
their food, and watched over them as well as any old hen could have
done.

[Illustration: “Round his head she put a wreath of long sprays. It was
great fun.”]

She found time for this in the midst of other work. There was much
to do, after a whole month’s neglect: the house needed cleaning and
setting to rights, and the yarn for the new suit must be finished at
once. The busy wheel hummed and whirred more noisily than ever, in the
afternoons, now growing long and bright; and Max, his cold quite cured,
sat by, with his carving-tools, as busy as she. Altogether, the time
flew rapidly; and the cheerfulness left by April’s visit still lay upon
the cottage when the evening came for May to appear.

There was no languor or dulness this time. The hearth was cleanly
swept, and the door left ajar that the guest might see the light as
she walked through the Forest. But so quiet was her coming, that her
hand was on the latch before they knew it, and both of them jumped
at the sound of her knock. As she came in, they saw that a lamb was
trotting beside her, held by a band of young spring grasses, curiously
woven together.

“This is my present,” she said.

Judge if the children danced for joy. A lamb! a real lamb! all for
their own! Never was any thing like it. They patted the pretty
creature, and lavished caresses upon him, till finally the chicks woke
up at the stir, peeped, called, and at last flew out of their baskets
to see what was going on; and one of them fluttered up on to the lamb’s
back, where he sat like a yellow buttercup on a bank of snow. May gazed
upon the scene with a calm smile.

“Now,” she said at last, “if you’re quite done, I’ll venture to remind
you that my time’s important. Business first, and pleasure after.
Suppose you put off kissing that creature again until I am gone.”

Thus admonished, the children reluctantly left the lamb, tied by his
grassy chain to the dresser, and came back to the fire. So far they had
been almost too busy to look at May; but now they did. At first Thekla
thought her the sweetest thing she had ever seen. Her hair curled like
the tendrils of a wild grape; no shell was ever lined with lovelier
pink than the bloom of her cheek. But, as she gazed, Thekla became
aware of an expression which contradicted the tender lines of the
face,--a certain teasing look, a frostiness about the blue eyes, which
baffled and surprised her. The same quality appeared in her words, and
even in the soft voice which uttered them. Fair and winsome as she
was, Thekla did not venture close, as she had done to April, but clung
tightly to Max’s hand while she listened.

“I reminded you,” proceeded May, “because I have really too much to
do to allow of my wasting time. Very few Months have the work put
upon them that I have. June pretends to be busy; but, after all, most
of it is finishing off what I began. And as for April, she is a sad,
idle girl, and does almost nothing. Why, I came upon her just now,”
said May, in an aggrieved voice; “and there she was having a game of
play with that good-for-nothing Jack Frost, tickling him with her warm
fingers and screaming with laughter; and of course I shall be expected
to make up for all she leaves incomplete. There’s the great wash of
the year, for instance. It fairly belongs to her; but she never _will_
do it. And I’ve all the plants to wake too, which is a hard job, for
they are the sleepiest little things imaginable; and the gardens to
tidy, and all. So you won’t wonder that I can’t spare many minutes for
telling stories.

“Did you ever have a garden?” she went on.

“Oh, yes!” replied Thekla. “Max makes me one every summer.”

“It’s very pleasant,” said May; “but when your flower-beds are as
big as all outdoors, as mine are, there’s a great deal of care and
responsibility in them, I assure you. I like it, however. I enjoy
sowing millions of seeds, and setting little roots to straggle, and
pruning and clipping. Every flower that ever grew is in my list, and
I manage to see it in bloom somewhere or other. If I were subject to
rose-cold, I should go crazy; for smelling is my delight. Ah! you
should see my rose-beds in Damascus. But the nicest garden I ever made
was a very tiny one which was planted to please some little children.
Shall I tell you about it?”

“Oh, yes, do!” cried Max.

“It was in a cold country, a long way from here, which I never visit
till pretty late in the season. You have to cross the sea to get to it.
Once only red people lived there. They dwelt in wigwams, and didn’t
care much for me, except that I melted the snow which kept them from
their hunting-grounds. But one year, on arriving I found something new.
A ship lay on the shore, and people with white faces were pitching
tents and building huts as if they meant to stay. Among them were some
children.

“Of these, two particularly took my fancy, two little sisters, fair as
lilies. One was almost a baby. When they sat at the door of the tent,
I used to steal up unseen, and pat their cheeks with my hand. They did
not know it was I; but they liked it.

“The men were busy in cutting trees for the houses. The women had to
cook and wash and sew. There was hard work in plenty for all. No one
had time to amuse the little ones, and the idea occurred to me of
making them a garden.”

“That was good of you,” said Thekla, her heart warming to this Month
who was so kind to little children.

“Ah!” replied May, coldly, “you think so?” Thekla felt snubbed, and she
said no more.

“The place I chose,” said May, resuming her story, “was a good way
off in the woods, a hidden nook, just such as I love. The trees stood
thickly about it, but they opened and left a spot where the sunshine
could come in and warm the earth. There for many days I worked with
busy fingers, clearing away dead leaves and roots, and covering the
ground with a moss carpet thick and soft, into which tiny coral points
were stuck to please baby eyes. In the very middle I set a snow-white
mushroom, glistening and white as an ivory umbrella; and all about it I
planted and wreathed the sweetest flower I know,--a flower whose cups
are as pink as a rose, and hold a fragrance so rare, that if a perfumer
could collect it in his bottles it would be worth its weight in gold.
When all was done, it was the daintiest little garden ever seen; and
now it only remained to entice the babies thither to enjoy it.

“This was easy. I selected a warm day, that they might not catch cold;
and, as they sat at the door of the tent, I crept up and sat beside
them. They did not see me, but I whispered in their ears,--a low,
coaxing whisper which I only use for babies.

“‘In the woods,’ I said, ‘the pretty, pretty woods, are such beautiful
things! Red flowers and blue flowers, for you to play with; and
squirrels with frisky tails, and birds which sing all the time. Oh,
such fun as it is!’

“The baby laughed out, and showed her teeth white as milk; but it was
only at the song in my voice, the words she did not understand. The
elder one listened; and, as I went on, her small feet began to twitch
and dance, as if they could no longer keep still.

“‘Come, Sissy,’ she said. ‘Let’s go and take a walk over yonder where
it is so green. Sister’ll find you some flowers to play with.’

“Baby was all ready for that, or any thing else. To her, ‘Sister’ was
quite a grown-up person, because she could talk plain, and wore a funny
little russet petticoat like their mother’s. So side by side the little
lambs trotted away. There was nobody on the watch to see them go, and
soon the dark wood hid them from view. I held ‘Sister’s’ other hand,
and gently guided to the right path.

“It wasn’t much of a path. There were tangled mosses and rough boughs
to catch the little feet; but I held fast, and did not let them trip.
And by and by, when we came to a smoother place, I took from my bosom
a butterfly I had brought on purpose, and set it flying before their
eyes. There was no danger of tears or fright after that.

“Such a jolly race as then began! I had ordered the butterfly to fly
slowly, so the clutching fingers seemed always just about to grasp it.
Such funny, tripping steps, such peals of glee! Never was a merrier
hunt! The hunt led them a long way. Once Baby’s fingers almost closed
on the painted wings, but still the butterfly flew before, and still
the children ran behind; when all at once a third baby appeared, to
share the chase--another child, a tiny Indian boy. No dress hid his
small, dark limbs. A little bow was in his hand, a quiver on his back;
and as he jumped from behind a bush, and joined in the frolic, it was
like a brown twig flying after two snow-white blossoms blown from the
tree.

“The little ones were not frightened. They took kindly to a new
playmate, whatever his color might be. ‘Sister’ made friends at once,
while Baby stared at him with her big blue eyes. On they trotted
together; and by and by the nimble boy made a clutch which secured the
butterfly, and the brown head and the fair ones met together over the
prize.

“‘Pitty! pitty!’ cried Baby, and she patted the little Indian with her
soft hand. Then the same soft fingers made a grab at the purple wings.
Ah me! one of them came off in her grasp. My poor butterfly! The first
of the season!

“The children were sorry. Children are always sorry,” said May, tartly,
“after the mischief is done; but I don’t see that it makes them any
more careful next time. In two minutes the dead insect was forgotten by
everybody but me. I picked him up, you may be sure; and that evening
made him a little grave under a partridge-berry vine.

“It was droll to hear the three babies talk together. They had no words
in common; but they had fingers to point with, comical little heads
to nod and wag, and eyes to explain the meaning of each gesture. So
they got on wonderfully. The brown baby’s name was Al-a-gon-qua, but
‘Sister’ called him Ally.

“‘My name Ruth,’ she said, ‘her name Baby,’ speaking very loud to make
it easier to understand.

“Ally tried to say it, but couldn’t get nearer than ‘Tute.’ This was
stupid; but he was a clever baby, for all that. He could take straight
aim with his bow, and bring down a robin or a quail ten yards off. He
knew how to find the water-springs. He could climb a tree, and swim
like a jolly little polliwog. Fearless as a squirrel, he sprang about
the trackless wilderness without pathway or guide, and needed neither,
and knew no fear.

“All the time they talked, the little ones were getting deeper and
deeper into the wood. They did not know where they were going; but I
knew, and guided every step.

“And now they reached the garden. The sun lay warm and bright on the
moss; and, at sight of the fairy cups of pink and snow and of the ivory
mushroom, they laughed for joy.

“‘Pitty! pitty!’ cried Baby again, using her sole little word; and,
with one consent, all three sat down together in the midst of the
flowers. How I did enjoy it! The long, cold voyage at sea, the bleak
spring, the crowded home in the tents where all were too busy to notice
them, were forgotten as they sat there in my garden; and they buzzed
like bees in the sunshine. It was the sweetest sight to see!

“Such games as they played! Baby pulled flowers till her lap was full.
She tossed them about. She put heaps of them on her head, and screamed
with laughter as they rained down into her eyes. Ruth meantime was
turning the little Indian into a big nosegay. She stuck leaves all
over him. His quiver she filled with blossoms. Round his head she put
a wreath of long sprays. It was great fun. Luckily, the small russet
petticoat had a pocket, and in it was a big ship’s-biscuit; so, when
dinner-time came, they ate that, and were not hungry. As long as the
sun shone, the play lasted; and he stayed late that night, as if to
enjoy the pretty show as long as possible. But at last the long shadows
had begun to creep over the place, and I to feel embarrassed as to how
to get my babies home again, when the bark of a dog was heard close at
hand. Then I was easy; for I knew somebody was coming to find them.

“Sure enough, before the dusk had crept over the happy group in
the sun, they came,--two men with anxious faces, and guns on their
shoulders, and a pale, frightened woman. That was the Mother. They
could hardly believe what they saw. Bears and savages had been in their
thoughts all the way. Never once had they dreamed that the little ones
were playing in _my_ garden.

“How the woman ran when she saw the children! How she caught up and
kissed Baby, and hugged little Ruth in her arms! ‘O children!’ she
cried, as soon as she could speak, ‘how came you here? How could you
frighten us so?’

“Ruth looked puzzled. ‘I guess it was the butterfly,’ she said: ‘it
came along, and showed us the way.’

“‘Who is this?’ asked one of the men.

“‘That’s Ally,’ explained Ruth.

“‘Poor boy!’ said the Mother. ‘I thought even the savages were too
tender of their babes to let them thus alone in the forest. We will
take him home with us, husband, and cherish him. Perchance his friends
may seek him out.’

“But to all their words and kind looks the little Indian was deaf.
When they pointed to the setting sun in token that night was near, he
pointed to the east as if to say that the same sun would rise again
before long. They tried to entice him with caresses; but he shook
himself free, and, signing to some distant part of the wood where his
home lay, he emptied the flowers from his quiver, threw back his black
hair with a toss, and with a few active bounds disappeared from their
sight. Ruth cried after him, ‘Ally! Ally!’ but it was all in vain. He
was gone; and he never came back.”

“And what became of Ruth and Baby?” asked Thekla.

“Oh! they went home with their Father and Mother; and good care was
taken that they should not stray again. I used to visit them sometimes,
and play with their hair and soft cheeks; and I taught them to call
the pink blossoms by my name. ‘May-flowers’ they are termed to this
day; and they are such favorites, that I plant immense beds of them in
that country every spring, and then people grumble that there are not
enough.”

“And is that all about the little girls?” persisted Thekla.

“Dear me!” said May, “you are hard to satisfy. No: of course it’s not
all. Baby grew up. Some one said she married the Governor. Only think,
Baby marry a Governor! As for little Ruth, she didn’t grow up: she went
to Heaven instead; and so stayed a child for ever. Nobody knows now
where her grave is, excepting me; and every year I plant May-blossoms
upon it.”

May’s voice was a little sad, and her eyes looked sweet and tender.

“How about Algonqua?” inquired Max, who was rather ashamed of feeling
affected.

“He became a great chief,” said May, “and lived to be a hundred. I
heard that he was buried in a mound out West, over the top of which a
railroad now runs. But about that I am not sure: my business is not
with the dead, but the living.”

And saying this, she rose briskly up. “I meant to have done in just
half an hour,” she remarked, “and it is nearly an hour and a quarter.
I’ll take those moments at once, if you please.”

Her manner was so sharp and decided that they did not dare urge her to
stay. Max brought the can, and Thekla lighted her to the door. When she
had departed with a curt “good-by,” they felt perplexed and puzzled.

“She’s very pretty,” said they, “but somehow not at all what we
expected.”

[Illustration: “This is my present,” she said.]




CHAPTER VI.

THE LITTLE HOUSEKEEPERS.


The lamb speedily became accustomed to his new home. When Thekla
brought him food, he would cuddle close, and lick her fingers, bleating
softly. Before long he was grown so tame that, if Max seized his two
fore feet and waltzed round the room, he made no objection, but frisked
funnily, as if enjoying the joke. Best of all, however, he loved to lie
beside Grandfather’s chair, within reach of his stroking hand. The old
man found continual pleasure in the gentle creature, whose wool was
scarcely whiter than his own snowy hair. With the serene faith of old
age, he asked no questions as to the new possession, but accepted it
calmly and without wonderment; for Grandfather was getting very old.

[Illustration: “You should have seen Dotty, with her sleeves rolled up,
sweeping away for dear life, and ordering ‘dear’ about.”]

As for Thekla, she thought there was never a lamb like this. For his
sake, she loved all lambs; and often, at her wheel, would sing the
“Lamb Song,” with which babies are hushed to sleep. It ran something
like this:--

          “Lambs in the daisies,
            Whiter than they;
          So in her snowy bed,
          Tossing her golden head,
  Frolics my baby,--like lamb at its play.

          “See how the little one
            Frisks by its dam!
          Knowing no harm or fear,
          Happy if she is near:
  Thus to my bosom clings closely my lamb.

          “Now comes the Shepherd,
            Counts every one,
          Leads to the pastures fair
          Where the sweet streamlets are,
  Shields from the tempest, and shades from the sun.

          “Jesu, the Shepherd dear,
            Knoweth his sheep;
          And in His gracious arm,
          Safe from all fear and harm,
  Keepeth his lammies, and ever will keep.”

So, with songs and busy days, the month sped quickly away.

“Oh dear, I wish it were night!” said Max on the morning of the 30th.
“April and May were so nice that I’m really in a hurry to have the day
go.”

“I’m not,” replied sensible Thekla. “I like to have to wait a little
for pleasant things, because then they last so much longer. And I’m
real glad there are so many more Months to come,--six,--no, seven,
counting June. Let’s work hard to-day, Brother; and then the time will
seem short.”

Max agreed; and by twelve o’clock the famous spoon, upon which he had
been so long engaged, was done. It was cleverly carved for a young
workman; and, as there was plenty of time before the Fair, he set to
work at once upon a fork to match, and grew so interested that when the
sun set he cried out, “Oh dear, it’s too bad! The days aren’t half long
enough.”

Thekla laughed, but was too wise, and too tender of Max’s feelings, to
say, “I told you so,” as some little girls would have done. She only
put aside her work, and made haste with the supper, that all might be
tidy and in order for the coming guest.

The evenings were still cool enough to make a fire comfortable, and the
hearth glowed bright as in winter. But the casement stood open; and,
one on each side, the children perched themselves to wait for June.
She arrived promptly, the pink sunset glowing behind her figure, as it
issued, all clothed in white, from the leafy woods. Max and Thekla flew
to meet her. On her head was a wreath of flowering hawthorn. She held
up the skirt of her gown filled with strawberries.

“Put in a thumb, and pull out something nice,” she said merrily, as she
saw them coming.

Both thumbs and fingers were soon red as cherries; for all the time
June told her tale they kept going in and out of the fragrant,
fascinating lap, and conveying red, delicious mouthfuls to the little
lips dyed deep with juicy stains. It was wonderful how the children
took to June. It seemed as if they could not get close enough. They
lay on her lap, put their arms about her neck, kissed and played with
her hands, were not one bit afraid of her;--and she evidently was used
to and liked it, for she only smiled when they did so. This was her
story:--

“Last year I had to take a long ride over the Desert, and it was
extremely hot. So, as soon as was possible I came away, and went to a
place among the hills, to cool off. A very nice, old-fashioned, little
place it is. People from the city go there in the summer; and this
time, as it happened, they were earlier than usual.

“I love children very much, so I soon got acquainted with all in the
village. There were ever so many of them. Some, in fine ruffled frocks,
were thin and white, and had blue circles round their eyes. That was
because they had been taken to parties in the winter till they were
almost dead. And some were all worried out with going to school, and
had round shoulders and tired faces. And a few were dear natural little
boys and girls, with lips and cheeks the right color, and plenty of
clean common clothes to romp in. I loved all of them, and they me;
but these last loved me best. We used to spend whole days out-doors
together, playing ‘I spy’ and ‘hide-and-seek’ in the bushes. As a
general thing, they were pretty good. There was an Anna Maria, to be
sure, who slapped her little sister now and then; and one boy named
Johnny who _would_ climb trees after the robins’ nests: so that I was
forced at last to push him off a bough and sprain his ankle, to make
him let them alone. But, on the whole, I was well satisfied with them.
And my prime favorite--the roundest, jolliest, nicest, prettiest of
all--was little Dotty Dexter.

“Dotty was six years old, the dearest, cunningest mite of a romp you
ever saw, and at the same time a born housewife. All her life it had
been so. When two years old, she used to take her small apron and trot
round the nursery rubbing the furniture clean, as she had seen nurse
do. She could only reach to the seats of the chairs, and about half way
up the legs of the tables; but so far she always made them shine till
you could almost see your face in them.

“Dotty had an admirer. He was one year older than she, and his name was
Willy Pringle. She loved him very much, partly because he had a jacket
with two pockets, and gilt buttons down the front, and partly because
when his mamma gave him any gum-drops he always brought her half of
them to suck. So when he asked, ‘Would she be his little wife?’ she
said she would.

“Down the village street stood a queer little house, which nobody lived
in. Once it had been painted brown; but the paint had rubbed off, and
now it was all yellow and spotty. The door wasn’t locked, because doors
never were locked in that place; and one day Willy and Dotty opened it,
and strayed in to take a look.

“It was a most beautiful house. There was a hall, with an upstairs
and a downstairs to it. The upstairs went to the bed-rooms, and the
downstairs to the cellar. There were two rooms,--a parlor and a
kitchen; and two bedrooms, and the cellar: that made five. There was
a stove in the kitchen, with real holes in the top, and a pipe. It was
rather rusty, but a delightful stove notwithstanding. In the parlor
was a chair and a stool and another chair, all three quite ragged; and
upstairs, on one of the window-sills, stood a long row of bottles.
‘Hair Dye’ was written on the outside of them; and they smelt dusty,
when you put them to your nose. That was all the furniture; except some
pieces of plaster, which had fallen down from the ceiling.

“Dotty and Willy trotted over the place, hand in hand. Their conclusion
was that there never was such a nice house before for two young people
to go to housekeeping in.

“‘We’ll call it ours, you know,’ said Dotty, ‘and play we live in it.
Only we won’t stay at night, ’cause Mamma says mice always get into old
houses. And it scares me dreadful when I hear them scratch.’

“‘Pooh!’ said Willy, ‘to be afraid of mice! But then you’re a girl,
Dotty, so it’s no wonder. Ain’t it a nice house? We’ll stay here ’most
all the time, won’t we? Only sometimes we’ll let the others come and
play with us.’

“‘Sometimes,’ replied Mistress Dotty, with an air of
experience,--‘sometimes; but not _fekently_, ’cause visitors is a
bother! I heard Ma say so. Now the first thing we’ve got to do is to
clear up. Where can we get a broom, dear?’

“Dotty said ‘dear,’ because Mamma sometimes called Papa so.

“‘I guess Miss Hepsy would lend us one,’ answered Willy.

“Miss Hepsy was a kind old lady who lived next door. When she heard who
her new neighbors were, she laughed till her sides ached, and lent them
the broom with all the good-will in the world.

“‘Keep it as long as you like,’ she said: ‘you’ll find it handy.’

“You should have seen Dotty, with her sleeves rolled up, sweeping
away for dear life, and ordering ‘Dear’ about as if she had been
ninety years old! When the sweeping was finished, they got some
water in a ‘Hair Dye’ bottle, and washed the stairs with Dotty’s
pocket-handkerchief. That was fine fun!

“‘Course we must have a door-plate, dear!’ said the indefatigable
Dotty, this being done, ‘else folks won’t know who to ask the girl is
at home.’

“So Willy cut a square piece of brown paper, and printed on it in big
letters, ‘Dotty and Willy Pringle, Esquire.’ After which, they stuck it
on the door with a bit of glue which he fortunately had in his pocket.
He had put it there to chew!”

Here June stopped, for Max and Thekla were in fits of amusement. June
laughed herself, and showed a dimple in each cheek, and one in her chin.

“I don’t wonder you think it funny,” she said. “I was holding my sides
all the time myself. It was too comical,--the wise air of that mite of
a Dotty, and the way she made Willy mind her.

“When the little people went home to dinner, and told their intentions
about the house, none of the older folks made any objections. Dotty’s
Mamma walked down to make sure there was nothing dangerous about the
premises; and, as all seemed safe, leave was given them to play there
as much as they liked.

“It was wonderful to see how much they managed to accomplish. All the
village took an interest, and the good wives hunted their garrets over
for old duds to furnish out the little cottage. Before long there
were chairs and tables enough to supply quite a large company; and
so much cracked crockery that, burning to use it, Dotty and Willy
were constantly going about and begging for something, to drink from
their cups and pitchers. The Mammas finding this out, and thinking a
lunch would be a good thing for such busy workers, gave the milkman a
standing order to leave a pint of milk every day at the door. Never was
any thing so charming. He would stop and ring his bell just as he did
at the grown-up houses, and Dotty--always keeping him waiting a moment
for dignity’s sake--would march out with her tin measure in her hand. I
suspect the milkman enjoyed the joke as much as anybody, for I never
in my life did see such big pints as he used to pour out of his shining
dipper.

“The whole house was scrubbed every day. Not because it was dirty,
but because Dotty loved to do it. They lived principally in the
kitchen, because the village custom was to use parlors very little,
and keep them very dark; but now and then, when Dotty opened a chink
of the parlor shutters and let in a little light, you perceived
that the apartment was a magnificent one. There was a table with
two daguerrotypes open upon it, and a copy of ‘Doddridge’s Rise and
Progress,’ put there, as Dotty said, to look ‘littery.’ The chimney
held a great bunch of asparagus feathers; and on the shelf, on the
sill, everywhere, were flowers,--in mugs, bottles, pitchers, glasses.
Peonies, dandelions, roses,--it didn’t matter which: all was fish that
came to Dotty’s net.

“It was a grand sight to see the family at dinner,--Mrs. Dotty, Mr.
Willy, and a doll named Araminta. The meal was simple. Sometimes it
was bread and butter, sometimes only fennel; but always there was milk.
The finest table-manners were practised. Araminta was never allowed to
eat with her knife, or put her elbows on the table; and once, when she
attempted to tilt her chair on two legs she was very severely punished.
Oh! I assure you, Dotty was a disciplinarian.

“I don’t think any palace that ever was built gave half so much
pleasure as that little house. The very crown of all, however, was the
tea-party, given just before they came away. I wasn’t there myself, of
course; but September told me about it. She was invited.

“Willy’s Papa had been greatly amused at the whole thing, and he
helped. Two long evenings he spent in getting up the cards of
invitation. They were neatly printed, and bore the following words:--

        “‘Mr. and Mrs. William Pringle
  request the pleasure of your company to tea
   on Wednesday afternoon, at five o’clock,
    at their residence, No. 17 Elm Street.
                 R. S. V. P.’

“All the little boys and girls were immensely excited when these cards
came, and especially at ‘R. S. V. P.’ They were anxious to know what
it could mean. Some one told them, ‘Real Sweet Violet Powder;’ but the
children said, ‘Pshaw! that was too silly.’”

“What did it really mean?” asked Thekla.

“I’m sure I don’t know,” said June. “How should I? I never go to
parties. Perhaps the last word is ‘Pringle:’ that begins with ‘P.’ But,
whatever it means, it was nice to have them printed there, because it
set the little folks guessing, and doubled the fun. Meantime, Dotty and
Willy were hard at work getting ready for the grand affair. It took
almost a week, I can tell you.

“Every thing had to be scrubbed, of course. All the windows were
washed, and the furniture dusted. The neighbors sent contributions of
cake and biscuit; and, to make the feast more imposing, Mr. Pringle
ordered up a big basket of peaches.

“When the time came, Dotty and Willy, in their best clothes, sat on
two chairs waiting for the company, and looking very solemn. Every one
had to rap on the door; and Dotty, on opening it, would say, ‘Please
s’cuse me for coming my own self, ’cause I’ve sent my girl out on a
_current_,’ which was very impressive.

“Then the little visitors would come into the parlor, and sit down.
They all tried to be very grave and grown-up; but it didn’t last long
with most of them. Dotty’s dignity, however, held out to the end. When
she sat at the head of the table pouring tea (out of the pitcher), she
was a sight to behold.

“‘Mr. Pringle,’ she would say, ‘please _distibit_ those peaches. You
ain’t so polite to the company as I could wish.’

“The very next day after this happy one, Dotty’s Mamma and Papa went
away, and Dotty with them. All the good times were over. She sat on
her nurse’s lap and sobbed, as they drove down the street. When they
passed ‘No. 17,’ it seemed as if her heart must break. As for poor
Willy, he felt as badly as she; but he wouldn’t cry, because he was a
man and the head of a family. When the carriage was quite out of sight,
he walked down to the house to see if it would make him feel better.
But it looked empty and lonely, with no cunning little figure trotting
about, broom in hand; and was altogether so dismal that the poor little
man couldn’t bear it, and, as there was nobody to see, he just sat down
and cried as hard as Dotty herself. Next day he, too, went away. And
since then nobody has lived in the cottage; but the neighbors still
tell of the droll little housekeepers, and the nice times they had
there.”

“Oh, don’t go! Tell us another,” pleaded the children, as June rose
gently from her seat.

“Look at the clock!” remonstrated June.

Sure enough, it was half-past nine. How the hours had flown!

“I’m nothing unless I have plenty of roses,” she went on; “and so far
I’ve only this handful to begin with. The rest are in your can, you
know.”

“Take some more,--pray do!” entreated Max. “Never mind if the other
Months are a little short.”

“But that wouldn’t be fair,” replied June. “Every one has a right to
his own. Good-by, Max. Good-by, Thekla darling. Next year, if all is
well, I’ll see you again.”

So saying, she glided from the door.

[Illustration: “As there was nobody to see, he just sat down and cried
as hard as Dotty herself.”]




CHAPTER VII.

THE LAST OF THE FAIRIES.


That visit of June’s was a bright spot, and the month that followed a
lovely one. Never had grass been greener or wild flowers bloomed so
thickly. The trees were full of birds, which sang all day, and all
night too, as if too happy to sleep. Fragrant winds seemed to woo the
children out of doors. They passed half their time in the wood; and
often while wandering about, fancying that they caught the gleam of
June’s smile or saw the skirt of her robe vanishing among the trees,
they would pursue; and, though nothing but a dewdrop or a bough of
white blossoms waving to and fro could be found, still the sense of
her presence never left them, and it made the sweetness of the season
still more sweet.

[Illustration: “The children loved us, and listened for our voices.
Their bright, untired eyes could perceive us, as we swung from the
blue-bells.”]

Wherever Thekla went, her pets went too. The little maid in gray
kirtle and scarlet jacket, with a yellow chicken on each shoulder, and
the white lamb following close behind, rubbing its cold, soft nose
against her hand, made so pretty a picture that it seemed sad it should
ever grow old or in any way alter. But little girls cannot always be
little, nor is it desirable they should; and, for the lamb, practical
Thekla had no notion of keeping him for a useless plaything. Already
she had begun to talk of the stockings Grandfather was to have out of
the first shearing when lammie should become a sheep, and the comforter
which she would knit for Max to tie about his throat on cold days. And,
as if to please her, lammie made haste to be big.

As the days came one by one, long and beautiful, it seemed hard to let
them go. “Oh, not yet!” the children cried each night to the sun as he
dipped below the horizon; and each night he tarried longer and longer,
as if in answer to their prayer. But in the end he always had to go.
And so, too, the sweet Month finally said “Good-by;” and it was time
for July to make her appearance.

The few sticks which boiled the porridge had blackened into ashes upon
the hearth, and the children sat hand in hand in the open doorway. A
breeze was stirring. Sweet smells came on its wings from the woods. It
was the warmest evening yet, and the first upon which the fire had been
suffered to go utterly out.

By and by they saw July coming. She had taken off her hat for coolness,
and was fanning herself with the broad brim. It was made of the leaves
of some foreign tree, and shaded her bright, sunburnt face like a green
roof. Thekla privately thought that it must have been taken off a good
many times before, or July wouldn’t be so brown.

“Well, I’m glad to get here,” she said, seating herself and flapping
the hat to and fro: “it’s almost too warm for long walks. Not that
I can afford to sit still in any case: I’m too active a person for
that. But just here it is really quite comfortable. I supposed I should
find you all burnt up, like the people outside there,” pointing to the
wood; “so by way of a present I brought these,” and she produced two
palm-leaf fans.

The children were delighted. They had never seen any before. “Are they
really made of leaves?” they asked.

“To be sure,” said July. “How odd that you shouldn’t know! Why, over
in America every man, woman, and child has one. They are plenty as
blackberries,--babies cry for them. And, speaking of blackberries, here
is a pocketful I picked as I came along. You can be eating them to
keep yourselves from getting impatient; for I’m all out of breath, and
can’t begin yet.” Saying which, she turned the pocket inside out on the
door-step.

This was good fun. Blackberries grew too far off to be things of every
day, and these were the first of the season. One after another, the
shining black beads disappeared down the little throats. By the time
the last had vanished, July was rested, and ready to commence.

“You must know,” she said, “that way up North, in a region which I
sometimes visit, are two beautiful peaks called the ‘Marble Mountains.’
No mountains in all the country are so beautiful as they. When the full
noon smites them, they gleam like snow; and their glistening seams give
out sharp glints, between which lie shadows of the purest, softest
gray. But at sunset and sunrise they are all lovely pink, like roses;
and so enchanting do they look, that miles and miles away the children
watch them, and fancy the fairies must live there.

“It is a wild spot, and few people have ever reached it. Excepting
me: I go everywhere. But for a long time I contented myself with
hasty calls, and did not force my way to the heart of the place,
where the thick shadows lie. Last year, however, I resolved to make
more thorough work. Slowly and carefully I toiled through the dense
brushwood and the deep glens; and at last, in the very loneliest recess
of the mountain, I came upon--what do you think?--a fairy! The little
children far away had been right in their guess, you see.

“It was Midsummer-eve, the fairies’ own day; and he was celebrating it
with an out-door tea. His seat was in the middle of a circle of vivid
green grass, the kind that once went by the name of a ‘fairy ring.’ He
was quite an old fairy. It is difficult to determine about ages, but I
saw that at a glance. Beside him stood an immense toadstool, upon which
was placed his supper of honey posset; but he didn’t seem to have much
appetite,--in fact, he was dreadfully out of spirits, as I found after
we had talked a little while.

“‘I am the last of the little men in green,’ he said, glancing down at
his clothes, which were indeed of a delicate duckweed tint. ‘Many,
many centuries have I lived on earth; in fact, I may say that you see
before you that “oldest inhabitant” so frequently referred to in the
newspapers. My youth was a happy one,--how happy I do not now like to
recall. We fairies then were the great folk in England. Perhaps you
have heard of England?’

“I mentioned that I had, and was in the habit of making a visit there
every year.

“This pleased the fairy. ‘Ah! that is a country,’ he went on. ‘Such
moonlight! such woods! such _de_lightful society! Sherwood Forest now!
Many and many a night have I danced and made merry there in the days of
bold Robin Hood! But that was long, long ago.

“‘When we little people heard that a ship was to cross the sea,
and bring a colony of English to settle on these shores, we held a
meeting to consider what was to be done. There were children among the
colonists. Now it is a fixed rule among us that, wherever children go,
fairies must go too.

“‘It was a sad and painful thing to leave that dear land where we were
honored and believed in, but we are not of the kind who shrink from the
call of duty. I was among the earliest volunteers. Ah! if I had known,’
said the fairy, shaking his head, ‘had guessed, half what lay before
us, I should never have “signified in the usual manner”--by raising my
right wing--a readiness to go. But I was young in those days,--young
and ardent; and my soul was full of courage and adventure.

“‘Of the voyage I will not trust myself to speak. None of the
remedies--blue-pill, quassia, chloroform, ice on the spine, mustard on
the stomach, or keeping-your-eye-immovably-on-a-fixed-object--had been
invented, and we suffered agonies. When the ship touched Plymouth Rock,
I could hardly drag myself ashore.

“‘It was cold, very cold. No going out of doors was possible. We
huddled together in the tents, keeping in dark corners, and as much
out of sight as we could, for fear of getting our little friends into
trouble. For these colonists were a severe folk; and children _will_
talk, you know. And if ever we crept out to crack a tiny joke with
one, tell a story to another, or sing a snatch in the ear of the
cooing baby, some chatterer was sure to spill and bubble over with fun
and merriment; and then, lo! and behold, there would be a catechism
lesson to learn, or some stern reproof, which sent us cowering into
our retreats to weep over our poor little sobbing friends. So in time
the children learned to keep all the secrets we whispered them to
themselves; and that did not please us either, for we love jests and
laughter and outspoken words.

“‘Well, those hard times after a while passed by. The people grew and
increased. They conquered the wilderness, and built many towns. A
different order of things sprang up. It was then that we fairies reaped
the reward of our self-devotion. No longer was it considered sinful to
spin fanciful tales, or sing funny rhymes. The children loved us, and
listened for our voices. Their bright, untired eyes could perceive us,
as we swung from the blue-bells, or pelted each other with the brown
pollen of tiger-lilies; and they rejoiced with us. Babies crooned in
the sun as we rocked their cradles. And we played no tricks,’ declared
the fairy, growing excited: ‘we were a rational and well-conducted
people. Whether the catechism and godly talk we had heard in the tents
had sobered us, I know not; but certain it is we had lost some of our
mischief. No longer did we tweak the noses of ploughboys, or incite
the cow to kick over the milking-pail. No! On the contrary, we were
the helpers in all useful work. We made the butter come; we swept the
rooms, and straightened the shelves of good housewives; and were a
general blessing to the land.

“‘Alas! what a poor return have we met for all this! For a new age has
dawned, and another kind of child,--a child who reasons and thinks,
and studies arithmetic and the science of objects. We have lost our
worshippers. Even the babies sprawling in their mothers’ laps know
better than to believe in us. Long we strove,--we practised all our
lore, traced our rings in the grass, dropped fairy favors into little
stockings, made bluebottle-fly and dragonfly our messengers,--but all
in vain. The wish to see was wanting.

“‘Did we spin for hours, and overlay the grass with a silken carpet
to dazzle and enchant early peepers? Nobody cared a button; and some
parent would be heard explaining, “It is nothing but cobweb, my dear.
Come to the library after breakfast, and I’ll read you about it in a
book of Natural History.” Yes,’ said the fairy, bitterly, ‘it had come
to that,--the book of Natural History instead of the “Fairy Book”! Or
did we spread a tiny table like this, with strawberries ranged in row,
and leave it in the path where little travellers were wont to pass,
no one heeded it. “Only an old toadstool!” they would cry, and kick
it aside with their copper-toed boots. Ah! it was enough to break a
fairy’s heart!

“‘When we lit our tapers, and went out in procession in the evening, we
were called fire-flies! Our pretty songs, as we rocked in the boughs,
were ascribed to the wind; and “Hadn’t baby better have on something
warmer, dear?” Our fairy favors were treated with scorn. Once I dropped
a tester into a little girl’s shoe, as she paddled in the brook. Was
she pleased? Not at all! “Here’s an ugly yellow leaf in my boot,” she
said; and she plucked it out and threw it away.

“‘What was left for us to do, our occupation gone? Nothing! We resigned
ourselves to the inevitable. One by one we deserted the haunts, which
alas! knew us no more, and retreated farther and farther from the
abodes of men. At last we chose this Marble Mountain for our home. Here
long years we dwelt, a numerous colony; for other fugitives joined
our retreat. The Banshee inhabited for some months a cave upon that
western slope; but her perpetual lamentations made us sad, and at last
we united in a remonstrance; and she left for the Ojibeway Country,
where she still resides. Bogey too--harmless, though black--was for
long our hewer of wood and drawer of water. He now sleeps yonder, under
the greenwood tree; while beside him slumbers that forgotten worthy,
“The man who lived in the chimney,” once the terror of refractory
nurseries. Bug-a-boo also joined our band for a while, but deserted
us for a situation among the Ku-Klux. Even Santa Claus talked at one
time of uniting himself to our number, but he thought better of it. I
conclude,’ said the fairy, ironically, ‘that mankind found out some
way of turning him to account, and making him useful, or he would
certainly have come.

“‘One by one our once merry company drooped and faded. The monotonous
life of this place was too sad for them, used as they were to sunny
nurseries, gay flower-beds, and the world of fun. The graves of my
brothers and sisters lie about me, and here in the midst of them I
dwell. It is years since I have left my hermitage or seen a child;--in
fact, I don’t believe there is such a thing as a real child left in the
land.’

“So saying, the fairy ended his tale with a profound sigh. He pulled
his pointed cap (which was exactly like a little red extinguisher) over
his eyes, and to all my questions replied not another word. And so I
left him sitting alone and silent. Whether he still lives I do not
know. His poor body was thin as a grasshopper’s; and I suspect when I
visit the mountains again this year, I shall find his little skeleton
hidden away under a bunch-berry or a blade of grass.”

“Oh,” sighed Thekla, “how lovely! That was the best yet.”

[Illustration: “So saying, the fairy ended his tale with a profound
sigh.”]




CHAPTER VIII.

THE STORY OF A LITTLE SPARK.


“I wonder what kind of a story we shall have to-night,” said Max, as
they sat on the door-step waiting for August to appear.

Thekla, who had been ironing, looked very pale and complained of a
headache. The day had been hot; no cool wind had come with evening to
refresh them; the leaves hung motionless. Far, far away the tinkle of a
bell was audible, from some animal astray in the Forest.

“I don’t recollect much about August,” said Thekla, languidly. “Was she
pretty?”

“I don’t either,” answered Max. “There was such a confusion that night
the Months came, that I got them all mixed up in my mind. I think,
though, she wasn’t a she: she was a man.”

[Illustration: “For only think what that woman had on her hands: ...
she hitched the horse, ... snatched up her babies, and a poor old man
who lived with them.”]

“Oh, no!” cried Thekla, “August never could be a man, Max. What are
you talking about? I remember now: she was sweet and brown, and held a
sheaf of wheat in her hand.”

“No,” persisted Max: “that was September or October,--I forget which.
Depend upon it, August will turn out to be a gentleman.”

“And depend upon it, she is a lady!”

Thekla’s voice was positively fretful. Max was vexed for a moment;
then, remembering how patiently her little hands had worked all the
morning smoothing shirts and stockings for him, his heart grew tender.
Instead of going on with the dispute, he moved his seat closer; and,
pulling the flushed cheek down on his shoulder, began to cool it with
gentle wavings of his palm-leaf fan. It was extremely pleasant and
comfortable. Thekla closed her eyes: then she began to think of a long
procession of sheep jumping over a fence; and to count them one by one,
first a fleecy head, then a woolly tail;--and next she was fast asleep.
After which, she waked up suddenly; for Max gave a sudden jump, and
behold, August was close to them.

Thekla was wrong, after all; and Max right. For there stood a handsome
young man, with quick, fiery eyes and a bronzed face, round which
floated locks of auburn hair. He seemed very hot, and was wiping
the drops from his forehead; but, for all his good looks, there was
something about him from which the children rather shrank.

Yet he did not appear a bad fellow either; for he made himself at home
on the door-step, and borrowed the palm-leaf as if he had been one of
the family. Any thing so curious or beautiful as his dress the children
had never before seen. It was a loosely fitting garment of vivid green,
thickly wrought all over with a pattern in which ferns and vines and
dense, bright leaves were interlaced and twisted in the most wonderful
manner. A chain of fire-flies swung about his neck like a collar, his
hat was looped up at the side with a glow-worm of immense size, which,
whenever he moved, glanced and gleamed in a sudden and bewildering way.

“What’s the matter?” he asked Thekla, in rather an abrupt tone.

“I’m a little tired, sir,” she replied timidly.

“Oh, ho!” said August. “I’ve caught you. You’ve been working at
something! I never mistake the signs. Now see here,--that’s a thing I
don’t allow: it’s against my rules. You may thank your luck I was not
here. Whenever I find children doing it, I give them a rap of some sort
to remember me by. So recollect that, and look out.”

Thekla shrank back, half alarmed; for, though August laughed, his voice
was menacing. And she reflected with satisfaction that the big wash
just concluded would be the last before winter. For you must know that,
in the Black Forest, Monday is not the terrible occasion it is with us,
and “washing days” come round a great way apart, once in three months
perhaps, or something like that.

“I’m going to tell you,” said August, after sitting some time in
silence, with his eyes glaring at vacancy,--“I’m going to tell you the
history of a spark of fire.

“It was born in a hunter’s pipe. When he had done smoking, he shook out
the hot ashes, and went his way. Most of them died in silence; but one,
my little spark, fell upon a brown leaf in a lonely place.

“It was very small, and rather dull. None of its friends and relations
supposed it would live long enough to attain to honor and distinction.
But I saw it when it fell, and foretold for it a career; in fact, I may
say assisted it somewhat in its efforts to get on.

“It had been a dry spring. All the rills and watercourses in the woods
were exhausted; and where once their bubbling voices sounded, thirsty,
white pebbles lay in the sun. The world was like a tinder-box. Slowly
and scantily the sap coursed in the veins of the trees; the vines which
clothed them were crisped with heat. The little spark had fallen at a
fortunate moment.

“It was very little: a spoonful of water could have quenched it. But
it had a soul which longed to expand and soar, and now its chance was
come. Steadily and stealthily it ran to and fro: first a twig, then a
bough, then a bush, received it. Day by day, day by day,--now it was a
carpet, wonderful and red, glinting the ground; then a fountain, which
threw sparks like spray into the air; next it climbed the trees, and
hissed and shouted aloft with an angry voice; then, writhing like an
angry snake, it twisted its folds round a fallen trunk, and strangled
it in fierce embrace. When a week had gone by, the little spark
gathered up its force, and prepared to travel. It had grown terrible.
Whole rivers of water would not quench it now.

“Terrible, but full of splendor! Its crested neck reared above the
forest; like a volcano its column of flame shot into the air; like an
avalanche it poured in fiery flood over whole acres. Strange, fantastic
patterns it traced as it went along, shapes of leaf and bough and
glowing vine; but there was none to admire them. The breath of its
fury was too hot for that!

“And now the woods were passed, and it reached the open country. You
should have seen the fences rush like blazing serpents to carry the
tidings to the barns! And the barns lit up in welcome, and called upon
the dwellings to do the same! Out rushed the men, cows lowed, horses
tied to burning mangers cried for aid with terrible voices, women and
children wept, the labor of years vanished in an hour! Ah! those were
glorious times for the little spark!

“I was there of course, had been there all along. Every mile of
the burning lightened my work for another year, and I patted the
spark on its back and urged it to speed. It was proud at heart now.
‘I will burn,’ it said, ‘till I dry up the great sea itself.’ It
raised its head and defied heaven. But I saw clouds coming, dark
clouds,--storm-clouds, fatal to fire,--and I cheered it on.

“We were drawing near a clearing. I had been there before,--a neat,
thriving place where all was in order, and children played beside the
door. I recollected one little girl with a rosy face, and for the first
time felt the stirrings of pity round my heart. So, holding back my
companion a moment, I shouted, from amid the smoke, a warning to the
sleepers within,--a warning in an awful voice.

“In a minute they were awake, and out they poured. It was pitiful to
see. Calmly and without fear they had lain down to sleep, thinking
us miles away. And here we were at the very door! The farmer was not
at home, but his wife was. And all I can say is,” remarked August,
admiringly, “if he’s any more of a man than she, it would be worth
people’s while to go a good way to look at him.

“For only think what that woman had on her hands. Behind, around,
all was fire. Sparks were falling upon the barn, the sheep in the
fields were blazing and dying in dreadful heaps. Her little children
screamed and clung to her. But she never faltered. With quick, nervous
fingers she hitched the horse to the wagon, flung in some clothes, some
blankets, whatever she could find soonest, snatched up her babies, and
a poor old man who lived with them, and lashed the horse to a gallop.
Before them was the open road, behind was death!

“The fire had struggled from my grasp. Furious at the sight of his
escaping prey, he flew forward. With rapid clutch he seized the
dwelling, the farm buildings, overtook the frantic cattle, hurled them
this way and that, and took the track of the retreating wagon. High
in air his dreadful eye glared after the fugitives; and myriad fiery
tongues licked right and left, the avenues of escape.

“But the woman never blenched! Once she stopped,--actually
stopped,--though the hot breath was on her cheeks! It was at the sound
of children’s voices crying aloud. There were five of them, alone in
a house, with none to help. She hurried them into the wagon. There
was no room for her now, so she stood upon the step as she drove, and
lashed the horse forward. On! on! We were drawing very near.

“So near that our hands could reach them. One spark darted upon the
clothing: it smouldered, then flamed. The children screamed; but the
mother seized the garment and threw it from the wagon, where it blazed
harmlessly. And still the horse galloped, and still the race continued.

“At last they could go no farther. The fire had outrun them: it was
before, beside, behind,--it left no pathway anywhere. The mother did
not give up. She stopped the horse, crowded the little ones under the
wagon, hung blankets over the sides to keep off the heat, and sitting
in the midst, the baby in her lap, waited her fate.

“The courage of that woman,” said August, clearing his throat, “I never
saw equalled. It wasn’t in my power to help her much. Fire is a bad
master, people say; and I was beginning to find it true. It mastered
me. But one thing I did: I stood by the horse’s head, and held him
tight so that he could not stir, even when the fiery rain fell fast
and singed his hair. It was the only chance for the poor children. And,
being there, of course I could see all that went on under the wagon.

“They were wonderfully patient. ‘Mother, are we going to burn up?’ I
heard one child say. But the poor mother did not answer, she only gave
a sob. None of them cried or screamed; but they just sat cuddled up
together, and were very quiet. Once the smallest one asked for a drink
of water! I declare, that made me feel bad!

“Just then I heard a sound above the roar of the flames which caused
me to prick up my ears; for I knew its meaning, and I said, ‘Ah, ha!
Master Spark, look out for yourself!’ And pretty soon a drop fell on my
nose. It felt like ice, I was so hot. And next the flames began to hiss
and spit, for more drops were falling; and then they made a great swoop
at the wagon, but I was beforehand with them there.

“‘Hands off!’ I said, and the rain chuckled as it heard me. The fire
raged; but it was no use. Guggle, guggle, spit, spit,--the blessed
shower continued to fall; and at last its roar was louder than the
flames had ever been. The spark had met its match.

“Ah! what a glad sound that was to the group under the wagon! The
children laughed for joy. They crept out to catch the cool flood upon
their parched limbs. But the mother did not stir. Her face was hidden
in her hands. I think she was praying.

“Hours and hours did the rain continue. It fought the fire as mortal
foes fight, it wrestled and beat it down, and tore and trampled it
under foot. But to the last the eye of the little spark gleamed red and
vengeful, and only when it was cold in death did its fury go out. Water
had won the day.”

Max and Thekla had been too horrified to move during this story, which
August recited rapidly and with great excitement. Tears were running
down Thekla’s face when he ended. “And the children,” said she, “what
did they do?”

“Oh, they got along somehow!” said August indifferently, as if ashamed
of his emotion. “People took them in, and after a while they built
another house. One little boy had intermittent fever, but that wasn’t
much. I shall see them again in a few days, probably; and one thing
I’ve made up my mind to,--that woman’s corn is to ripen this year, if
nobody’s else does.”

So saying, August arose, and shook himself, the fire-flies round his
neck gleaming like a blazing string as he did so.

“I must be off!” he said. “Where are my moments?”

Max brought them. So absorbed had he and Thekla been in the peril of
the tale, that neither of them noticed that August had produced no
gift. He, however, was less forgetful.

“Here’s your present, you know,” he said with a malicious smile, just
as he turned to go. “Take care! I have to open the bottle first. Crick,
crack!--here it goes.” As he uttered these words, he pulled out a cork,
and made a kind of toss. A buzzing sound was heard: something small
and winged flew out, and filled the air. August gave a loud laugh, and
vanished in the Forest.

Max and Thekla stood staring after him for a moment, stupefied with
astonishment. Then they began to dance up and down, and slap themselves
right and left with countenances as red as fire. Curious lumps were
forming on their faces and hands. You see mosquitoes are unknown in
the Black Forest, and August’s gift was a couple of dozen--very lively
ones--from the Jersey Flats!

[Illustration: Max “moved his seat closer; and, pulling the flushed
cheek down on his shoulder, began to cool it with gentle wavings of his
palm-leaf fan.”]




CHAPTER IX.

THE DESERT ISLAND.


The month that followed was a sorry one. Day after day rose dry and
burning: no cool winds fanned the breathless nights, no rain fell. The
poor children had headache, they felt limp and weary all over; and yet
each morning brought the same hard work which must be done, whether or
no. And sleep was rendered almost impossible by the mosquitoes, who
seemed to possess stings and wings and buzzes such as never mosquitoes
boasted before. Whenever poor Thekla dropped into a nap, after hours
of tossing, in the stifling loft which served her for bedroom,
“Spizz-z-z-z” the teasing little trumpets would begin; and immediately
she would be broad awake again, ready to cry with fatigue, and dealing
blows right and left, as if battling with an unseen foe. Max spent
hours in hunting them; but the mosquitoes hid themselves cunningly, and
could seldom be found. Never was such a tiresome, unpleasant August!
Before the last day came, our children quite hated him, in spite of his
beautiful face and rich, strange garments. He was a cruel, bad fellow,
they said;--they never wished to see him again.

[Illustration: “‘O Reggy!’ she cried, ‘the boat is running away with
us!’--‘Don’t cry, Emmy!’ he exclaimed. ‘It isn’t our fault, so nobody
will scold us. And now we’ll see the Island. Just think what fun!’ and
the whole boat-load shouted, and clapped their hands.”]

That closing evening was hot as ever. The sun went down red and lurid.
As the children sat side by side in the door-way, watching the long
level beams stream through the Forest, Max caught a distant glimpse of
August, pausing and glancing back, as for a last view of the cottage.
Max touched Thekla’s arm to make her look. At that moment August raised
his hand as in mocking gesture of farewell, and turned to go. Another
figure met his as he moved away. They stopped, embraced, then August
vanished; and with slow, gliding steps his companion advanced. It was
September,--a noble, matronly form, with dark-flushed, stormy brow,
frank smiling lips, and a sheaf of corn nodding over her shoulder.

Half-fearful and half-glad, the children rose to meet her. A basket was
in her hand. Without speaking, she raised the lid, and showed clusters
of ripe grapes, purple and white, whose delicious smell filled the air.
Then, putting an arm round the brother and sister, she made them sit
down on either side of her, and began to dole out the fruit, first to
one and then the other; saying nothing, but laughing silently at the
eager eyes and mouths. Coolness seemed to come from her garments; and,
as if following her track, a fresh wind sprang up in the Forest, and,
blowing down upon the group, rustled the leaves, waved Thekla’s light
hair, and refreshed soul and body like wine.

How comfortable it was! The children brightened, and began to chirp and
twitter like birds. “How good you are to us!” cried Max; while Thekla,
holding September’s hand, cuddled close to her, and laughed with
pleasure.

At last September spoke. Her voice was wonderfully rich and musical,
but full of deep, powerful tones, which it was easy to imagine could be
heard above the storm, or the loudest thunder. What she said was,--

“Are you better now, dears?”

“Oh! much better,” they told her.

“I met my Brother August as I came along,” continued September; “and
I guessed, from what he said, that he had been teasing you. He is a
fine fellow, but has a quick, revengeful temper; and he bears a grudge
against Max for stealing the moments. But it is too bad to visit it on
little Thekla, for she wasn’t to blame.”

“I’d rather share with Max, please,” said Thekla, shaking her head: “we
don’t want any thing different.”

“That’s a kind little sister,” answered September. “Well, August has
made you uncomfortable; but, after all, he hasn’t been so bad, for he
might have given you a stroke with the great yellow sun-club he keeps
on purpose to use when he is furiously angry. I can tell you that the
people on whom that falls don’t forget it in a hurry.”

Just then Thekla jumped, and slapped the back of her neck sharply.

“What’s the matter?” asked September.

“It’s those horrid bugs,” explained Max. “August brought them, a whole
bottle full, and emptied them all over the house. You can’t think how
they bite and keep us awake.”

“Aha!” laughed September, “that was really too bad! But you shan’t be
vexed any longer with them, Max. I have something in my pocket which
will soon put a stop to their biting.”

So saying, she produced a small box, and held it out for the children
to look at. It was marked on the lid,--

             Early Frost,
                  or
     Mrs. September’s Specific for
    Mosquitoes, Gnats, and Midges.
  (None Genuine without this Label.)

Inside were a quantity of fine glittering pellets like minute
hail-stones.

Just then a mosquito lit on Thekla’s arm. September laid her finger on
her lip, and quick as lightning dashed a pinch of the “Specific” over
him. The mosquito fluttered a second, dropped, and lay dead on the
ground.

“You see!” said Mrs. September.

Then she rose up, and went into the house, telling the children to sit
still and finish the grapes. They heard her moving softly to and fro:
after a while she came again, and showed them a handful of spider-web
legs and gauzy wings.

“There they are,” she said. “Not one of them has escaped. You will
sleep soundly to-night, little ones; and I shall give Master August a
piece of my mind next time we meet, for playing such naughty tricks.

“And now for my story. By the way, have either of you ever seen the
sea?”

“No,” replied Thekla. “But the Grandfather did once; and Fritz is there
now.”

“Fritz? Who is he?”

“Don’t you know?” said Max. “That’s our big brother, who went away
a great while ago, when Thekla and I were very little. He was
coming back; but, then, he didn’t come. I don’t know why. And now
the Grandfather says he never will. Is it because the sea is such a
pleasant place?”

“I don’t know,” replied September, dreamily,--“I don’t know why he
doesn’t come. But if you never saw the sea, how in the world am I going
to make you understand my story?”

“It’s very big,--I know that,” ventured Max,--“and all water.”

“Did you ever so much as see a lake or a pond?”

“No, only the little spring down there,” answered Thekla. “Oh, I know!
(joyfully). I can guess! It’s a great, great deal of water, thousands
and thousands of times more than there is in our rain-water tub!”

“Bless me!” cried September, almost in a pet. “Rain-water tub, indeed!
Why, child, if all the tubs in creation were put side by side, they
wouldn’t make a quarter of a sea! Quarter! they wouldn’t make a
millionth part! Now listen, while I tell you about it.

“It stretches miles and miles and miles. Get into a boat, and sail for
weeks and months, still the shore lies beyond, and still you are at sea!

“It is blue as the sky, and beautiful silver dimples come and go over
its face. Or at other times it is green, with waves fifty times the
height of your hut, and they rise and fall, and break in foam white as
milk. And, when the storms blow, it is black,--black as night,--and the
sound of its roaring is like wild beasts over their prey.

“I love the ocean. He and I are friends, though almost every year
we have a mighty quarrel, and the world rings with the noise. But
afterwards we kiss and make up, and part affectionately.

“And the little ones who live by the sea are my special pets. There are
ever so many of them, of all sizes and ages; and our frolics go on from
sunrise to sleepy-time.”

“What do you play at?” asked Thekla, getting interested.

“All sorts of games. The game of ‘Drown’ for one,--that is played
in the shallows,--and ‘Wet my neighbor,’ and ‘Polliwog.’ We build
sand-forts; go fishing with crooked pins; rock-by-baby in boats; paddle
about with no shoes on. I collect all sorts of pretty shells and weeds
for them; and drive schools of bright fish, to plunge and jump where
they can be seen. On Sunday there are Sunday schools, and they jump to
a tune in short metre. Oh, there is no end to the amusing things we do,
when we get together! They think there is nobody like me, especially
the Brown children.”

“The Brown children?” said Max, inquiringly.

“Yes: the ones who were carried off in the boat, you know.”

“But we never heard about them before,” remonstrated little Thekla.

“Why, so you didn’t!” cried September, recollecting herself. “Well, you
shall now; for that’s the very story I’m going to tell you.

“There are a good many of the Browns; and they live at a very nice
place on the sea-coast, called ‘Timber Cove.’ Plenty of rocks and sand
and surf there; and these jolly little Browns--prime pets of mine--are
as fond of the ocean as a nest full of young sea-mews. They were
always on the beach; playing plays, and ‘making-believe’ about going
to sea,--especially about going to an Island, which was one of their
favorite plans.

“I’ve seen Islands enough in my time, and don’t think much of them,”
went on September. “But there was a book in the nursery, which the
Brown children were for ever poring over, and which was all about an
Island. I don’t recollect its name; in fact, I don’t know how to read
myself, having always lived outdoors, and hated schools. But what
little I picked up about it sounded particularly silly; and as for the
Island, it was like none I ever saw or heard of. The little Browns,
however, believed in it as if it had been law and gospel; and were
perfectly sure if they could only just get out to a certain Island,
which lay just in sight from the shore, that there they should find all
the things spoken of in the book,--tigers and serpents and buffaloes,
and what not!

“One afternoon they were playing in a boat, which was drawn up on the
beach,--Reggy and Alice and Emmy, and Jack and Nora, and little Tom,
the baby. I was busy that day. The Sea and I had engaged in a wrangle,
and both our tempers were getting up. I forgot to look after my pets,
and one of the watch-dogs of Ocean seized the opportunity to creep up
and do them a mischief. These dogs are called ‘Tides,’ because they are
generally kept _tied_ up, out of harm’s way; but now and then the wild
things break loose, and then there is a fine to-do.

“The Tide was cunning. Silently he prowled about, drawing nearer and
nearer, till at last he fastened his teeth in the bow of the boat. Then
he pulled and pulled,--very gently, so as not to alarm the children;
and little by little dragged them away from the shore into the deeper
water. Next he gave a shove, and floated them off completely. And then,
beside himself with joy and frolic, he rushed for the beach; and,
plunging and roaring, began to turn summersaults on the sand, delighted
at his success. The little ones played on, unconscious.

“At last Emmy looked up, and gave a scream.

“‘O Reggy!’ she cried, ‘the boat is running away with us! Jump out
quick, and pull it in again.’

“But Reggy poked with a stick over the side, and looked sober. The
water was already over his head, and getting deeper every moment.

“Then a bright thought seized him. ‘Don’t cry, Emmy!’ he exclaimed. ‘It
isn’t our fault, so nobody can scold; and _now_ we’ll see the Island!
Just think what fun! It’s the most splendiferous chance!’ And he swung
his hat, and gave a great shout.

“So the whole boat-load, little Tom and all, shouted too, and hurrahed
and clapped their hands, and began to talk about what they would do on
the Island. They never felt afraid for one moment. Poor little lambs!

“All this time I was bandying words with my friend the Sea, who was
in a very ugly humor. I was getting mad myself, and was flinging
about, cuffing the ears of the pert little waves as they looked on and
tittered over the quarrel, when lo! and behold, I became aware of the
Brown family floating out in a boat, and in the highest spirits, to
meet us. And then I _was_ frightened, as you may imagine.

“There was no time to be lost. Open war between myself and the Sea must
begin before long I well knew, but I turned all my efforts to soothe
and delay. I coaxed and cajoled, unsaid some sharp words, and stroked
the angry waves the right way, till they took off their white caps
which they had put on defiantly, and obeyed my orders like good boys.
Then I laid hold of the boat, and drew it along toward the Island. It
seemed a pity the children shouldn’t go there since they had set their
hearts upon it; and, beside, I did not dare to take them home, for
there was the Tide growling savagely, and lying in wait on the beach
ready to snap at little legs the moment they tried to jump out.

“So I made for the Island. This was precisely what the Browns wished;
and they hurrahed louder than ever as they drew near. The excitement
became so great I could hardly keep them in the boat. The moment it
touched, out they tumbled, big and little, Reggy head over heels, and
Nora so nearly in the water that, to save her, I had to let go my hold
of the boat; whereupon two artful little billows rushed up, and before
I could say ‘Jack Robinson’ had snatched it out of reach, and were
tossing it on their heads with peals of laughter. I was vexed enough,
but there was no help for it. The Browns were prisoners, and must stay
on the Island whether they liked it or not.

“But, bless you! there was no question of liking! Nothing so enchanting
had ever happened before, the children thought. I looked to see them
disappointed at the non-appearance of elephants and tigers,--but not at
all! Up and down they raced, on the beach, in the woods, full of fun,
and making discoveries of all sorts. In less than two hours Reginald
and Jack had a heap of fir-cones higher than their heads, ‘for a fire’
they said, only unfortunately there were no matches to light it with.
Alice and Emmy had filled their aprons with shells and pebbles, Nora
was deep in a sand pudding, and Baby Tom had twice been fished from
a pool as wet as a frog, and set up in the sun to dry. All were as
busy as bees, and not a doubt or fear had so far arisen to mar their
pleasure.

“But at last it began to grow late, and the sun was dropping down the
sky into a dark cloud, which lay ready to catch and carry him off. The
little ones felt hungry, and began to talk about supper.

“What shall we have?” they asked.

“Reggy looked important. He took from his pocket a book. It was the
very one I told you of,--the one about the Island. Reggy usually had it
in his pocket.

“‘Let us see,’ he said, and read aloud,--

“‘We put some of the soup-cakes with water in our iron pot, and placed
it over the flame; and my wife, with little Francis for scullion, took
charge of peppering the dinner.’

“‘Me don’t like pepper,’ said Baby, in a disconsolate voice.

“‘Not “peppering,”--_preparing_,’ corrected Emmy, over Reginald’s
shoulder. ‘Baby shan’t have any bad pepper. Brother didn’t read right.’

“‘We haven’t got any iron pot,’ suggested Alice.

“‘Nor any soap-cakes,’ said Nora.

“‘_Soup_-cakes, little goose!’ cried the discomfited Reggy. ‘Nobody
eats soap. Well, then, we must think of something different. Let’s see
what else these people had.’ And he read again,--

“‘We sat down to breakfast, some biscuits and a cocoa-nut full of salt
butter being placed on the ground. We toasted our biscuit, and while it
was hot applied the butter, and contrived to make a hearty meal.’

“‘Bully!’ cried Jack. ‘Buttered toast is first-rate!’

“‘But there isn’t any butter,’ said Emmy.

“‘Nor any biscuit,’ added Alice, timidly.

“‘I declare,’ shouted Reggy, closing the book with a flap, ‘how in
the world is a fellow going to get supper for you as long as you keep
standing round telling him there’s nothing to eat!’

“This made me laugh so, that I had to run behind a bush to have it out.
When I came back, the dispute had been made up, and the children were
all setting off in a body along the beach to ‘look for a shipwreck.’

“‘There’ll be a barrel, or something,’ asserted Reggy: ‘there always
is!’

“‘Then I know what I hope will be in it,’ shouted Jack, with a caper.

“‘What?’

“‘Molasses candy and fire-crackers.’

“Now it happened that I was aware of a box drifting about half a mile
out or so; and, though I hadn’t the least idea of its contents, it
struck me it might please the children. So I flew out, and pushed it
in. There was an immense uproar as it came floating nearer and nearer.
The moment it could be reached, the two boys splashed in, grappled it,
and with loud hurrahs dragged it ashore.

“‘Ting-a-ling! ting-a-ling!’ sang Emmy, rapping the lid with her
knuckles. ‘Come to supper! Tea’s ready! Don’t you hear the bell?’

“‘Where’s the hammer, Em?’ asked Reggy.

“‘I don’t know. Have we got any?’

“‘Why, didn’t you put one in your pocket?’ demanded Jack, in an
indignant voice.

“‘Jack! A hammer in my pocket! It wouldn’t half go in. Just look!’
And she turned inside out a small muslin triangle, and exhibited some
crumbs, one raisin, and a pocket handkerchief far from clean.

“‘Well, that’s _too_ bad!’ cried Jack. ‘She’s forgotten every
thing, Reggy,--the fish-hooks, the nails, the ball of string, the
screw-driver, the--I don’t believe she’s even so much as brought a
needle. Have you, Emmy?’

“‘No: I didn’t know we were coming, you see,’ replied Emmy, in an
apologizing tone.

“‘Never mind,’ said Reginald, good-naturedly, as Jack gave an indignant
snort. ‘Emmy _ought_ to have remembered, of course, because she’s the
“Mother” of the party, and the one to bring the “miraculous bag.” But
to-morrow or next day there’ll be sure to be a wreck, and lots of nice
things come ashore, which will do just as well. So now let’s get this
fellow open.’

“It was not an easy job. However, what with stones, and a sharp stick,
the lid was at last pried off, and a quantity of damp sawdust revealed.

“The children poked and poked. At last Alice hit upon something hard.

“‘Perhaps it’s a “Westphalia ham,”’ she said. No! it was a bottle.

“It had no label; but Reggy knocked the top off against a stone, and
took a mouthful.

“‘Ph-shew!’ he spluttered, and spit it out again.

“‘What is it?’ cried the rest.

“‘Horrid! salt!’ cried Reggy, making dreadful faces. ‘It’s that stuff
Papa takes sometimes before breakfast,--I forget the name.’

“‘“Saratoga water”?’ said Alice, sniffing it daintily, and applying her
tongue. ‘So it is. Well, that’s real mean! I didn’t suppose medicines
and such things ever came ashore on Desert Islands!’

“It was clearly impossible to make a meal of ‘Saratoga water.’ So,
hungry and slow, the party went back to the grove.

“‘I’ll tell you what,’ said Reginald, ‘the first thing in the morning
we’ll catch a buffalo or a wild ass, and tame him. Luckily I’ve a piece
of string in my pocket, so we can “pierce his nostrils,” and put it in.
Then I’ll gallop round to the other side of the Island, you know, and
find things.’

“‘I want my supper,’ wailed Nora, who was too tired and hungry to be
consoled with this distant prospect of a wild ass.

“Tom began to cry too; and for a while the older ones were at their
wits’ end to comfort them. Some blueberries which they found had the
desired effect at last; and, cuddled in their sisters’ laps, the little
creatures fell asleep. The whole party nestled together in a mossy
place in the woods. The waves on the beach began to sound hollow and
mournful. Alice shuddered a little.

“‘Please hold my hand tight, Reggy,’ she said.

“‘Oh dear!’ sighed Emmy. ‘Was that a drop of rain on my nose? I do
believe it’s going to sprinkle! And we haven’t any umbrellas.’

“‘What did the people in the book do when it sprinkled?’ asked
Reginald. ‘Or didn’t it ever sprinkle there?’

“‘Only in the “rainy season,”’ replied Emmy; ‘and then they shut
themselves up in a cave. It must be nice to have “rainy seasons,” and
know just what to expect. Here, it just rains whenever it likes, and
catches you!’

“No more drops came, however; and before long sleep fell upon the
group. So sound were their slumbers that when, some hours later, a
horned creature stuck his head through the bushes, and then retreated
with a loud bellow, nobody stirred except Reginald. He, half-awake,
started up, muttering drowsily, ‘There’s the buffalo: we’ll fix him
to-morrow.’ But the noise died away; and he tumbled down again, and was
asleep in a minute.

“Soon after the flapping of sails reached my ear, and I ran down to
the beach. Sure enough, a white sail like a ghost was gliding rapidly
toward the Island. It was a boat. On the deck was Mr. Brown, looking
wild and ghastly,--quite unlike his usual jolly, comfortable self.

“‘There isn’t half a chance,’ he muttered as he sprang ashore. He went
questing up and down with a lantern. I followed, whispering comforting
things in his ear; but he never listened. At last he lighted on Emmy’s
pocket-handkerchief lying beside the smashed box.

“‘It’s hers!’ he cried, trembling with anxiety. ‘Search for the boat,
men.’

“But no boat could be found, and the Father groaned aloud.

“Meantime I was gently pulling Mr. Brown, now by the collar and now by
the coat-tail, and trying to turn him in the right direction. He was
frantic and obstinate, as men usually are; so he _would_ not follow. At
last, as hope grew less, his strength seemed to go too; and, little by
little, I drew him along to where the children lay. He was almost upon
them before he knew it. There they were, fast asleep,--Tom in Alice’s
lap, and Nora hugged tight in Jack’s arms.

“Well, you never saw any one behave as Mr. Brown did. He was like a
crazy person. He felt the warm little hands and the round cheeks, as if
he couldn’t believe his eyes; and made inarticulate sounds over them,
like some loving dumb animal. The sailors lifted them, still asleep,
and wrapped them warmly; but, just as they were moving off, Jack
roused. There was a stamping, bellowing sound in the brush-wood near by.

“‘There’s the buffalo again!’ he cried. ‘Catch him, Reggy!’ Then,
waking more completely, ‘Why, it’s Papa! O Papa, don’t let’s leave the
buffalo behind!’

“‘Buffalo!’ said one of the men. ‘There’s no buffalo, sir. That’s one
of Farmer Newman’s cows. He pastures them here in the summer.’

“Reggy was the next to wake. ‘Oh, it’s the savages!’ he exclaimed.
‘They’ve got us! Why, Papa, is it _you_?’

“Alice and Emmy roused at his cry, to be first frightened, then
charmed, to find themselves under their Father’s care. Before long the
whole party were awake, and lively as crickets.

“‘Only think, Emmy, I thought it was a buffalo, and it’s only a cow!’
concluded Jack.

“‘Cows!’ shuddered Alice. ‘Were there any cows on the Island? O Papa,
I’m so glad you came for us! I should have been so scared!’

“‘Why, Alice!’ cried Reginald. ‘Afraid! when you know you _said_ you
wanted to have a rhinoceros come, or at least an anaconda.’

“‘Oh well!’ replied Alice, ‘I wouldn’t have minded _them_; but I’m
afraid of cows!’

“I wasn’t quite easy all the way across. The Sea had evidently got his
back up, and I didn’t know but he might yet break out at any moment,
and do some dreadful mischief to the Browns. All went well, however;
and just in the faint gray of morning the boat scraped the sand, where
stood, dimly seen, a waiting figure. It was poor Mrs. Brown, who, all
that dreadful night, had stood there listening, and looking off to sea.

“‘All right, Mother!’ called out Mr. Brown, in a joyful, husky voice.

“But Mrs. Brown could not speak. When her husband laid little Tom in
her arms, and she felt his warm touch, she began to cry. The others
crowded about her, she hugged them tight, kissed the up-turned faces
without a word, and led them into the house, still crying for joy.

“I had a frog in my own throat, I can tell you,” continued September,
“so glad was I to see them safe at home again. But the Sea was growling
at my heels in a surly way, which aggravated me; so that, there being
no longer any reason for keeping the peace, I just went at him, and
relieved my feelings by one of the fiercest quarrels we ever had.
For a week we fought like giants. We tossed ships and lighthouses at
each other, and filled the world with fear. The people on the coast
still talk about it, and call it the great September gale. Though why
September, I don’t know. I’m sure it was a great deal more Ocean’s
fault than mine!”

“Oh!” said Thekla, drawing a long breath, “I’m so glad the children got
safely to land.”

“So am I,” said September, dryly. “There were a good many grown people
who didn’t, I can assure you.”

[Illustration: “A book of adventures the Brown children were for ever
poring over.”]




CHAPTER X.

NIPPIE NUTCRACKER.


Things went better after this visit of September’s. Cool nights
began. The noons were still hot, but with a different heat. Something
of life and freshness breathed in the air. Thekla’s wheel, set out
under the spreading boughs of an oak-tree, hummed as it turned, like
a great bumblebee. It had been silent of late, as if languid with
August’s warmth. Now its voice came back, and it sang merrily as ever.
Leaf-shadows fell from overhead, dappling the fair hair of the little
spinner, and the fleece of the lamb which lay at her feet. “Lamb” it
was still called, though fast getting into sheephood. Thekla had a real
motherly feeling toward it; and, as parents go on calling their boys
and girls “the children” when gray hairs and wrinkles have replaced
the curls and roses of youth, so the lamb was likely to remain a lamb
in her eyes for ever, should it live to become a patriarch of the flock.

[Illustration: “Miss N. Nutcracker, the Celebrated Philosopheress, will
lecture at Beech-tree Hall.”]

One thing only marred the pleasure of this happy month,--the dear
old Grandfather was poorly. Without disease or pain, patient always,
gentle, even happy, his strength ebbed daily. Some days he would not
rise from his bed at all; on others, he would have his oaken chair
drawn out into the sunshine near Thekla’s wheel, and would sit there
for hours basking in the warmth, and regarding the little girl with
fond, wishful eyes. Thekla took tender care of him. Love showed her
how. Love is a wise instructor, you know; and teaches in six lessons
what Time, slow old pedagogue, takes a lifetime to impart.

As the end of September drew near, Grandfather seemed a little
brighter; and, in her great wish to please and cheer him, a queer idea
popped into Thekla’s head. It was nothing less than to tell him all
about the Months and the moments, and let him join the story-listening
group. She consulted Max; and he thought it a capital plan, provided
October made no objections.

So Thekla told the tale in her pretty, soft voice; and Grandfather
nodded his head a great deal, and smiled, and was well pleased. How
much he understood is doubtful;--Old Age was singing its sweet lullabys
to the weary brain, and it was fast going to sleep, though now and
then it flashed again into wakefulness for a few moments. Thus much
he comprehended,--that a visitor was coming, and he must be ready. So
Thekla smoothed his white hair, and made him neat; and when October
appeared at the door, there sat Grandfather between the children, like
a snow-covered bough supported by two ripe roses.

Max and Thekla flew to meet the guest, and to whisper their request,
to which he listened with a kindly face, pinching each round cheek
gently meanwhile till it glowed with a fresher pink. When they ended,
he smiled, well-pleased.

“Yes, indeed,” he said: “the Grandfather shall stay. He is my old
friend. I knew him when he was no bigger than you, and he knew me. But
then the time came, as it will to you, when he saw without seeing, and
I was to him but a name. To the very young and the very old only am I
visible; for they are children alike. He will know me at once, be sure
of that.”

So saying, he walked in, sat down close by the oaken chair, and laid
his hand on Grandfather’s arm. The old man turned slowly, and a look of
recognition crept into his dim eyes.

“Catch! Carl, catch!” he murmured. “Where’s the basket? There never
were so many beech-nuts on the tree before.”

“That was the other boy,” explained October, in a whisper. “They always
went about together. But it’s a long time since I saw _him_.”

The children stood silent, watching the strange smiles which chased
each other over Grandfather’s lips. Now, too, they could look at
October, and see what manner of person he was. He had the brown,
bearded face of a man in his prime; but the hair was grizzled with
gray. There was something fatherly in the eyes, which were blue and
merry. His hunter’s dress--of scarlet, gold, russet, crimson, and
orange--was so gay that it would have seemed fantastic except for the
grace with which he wore it. A spray of purple leaves nodded in his
cap; a horn swung at his side, and beneath it a great pouch of fur into
which he now plunged his hand.

“Do you like chestnuts?” he said, throwing a double handful into
Thekla’s lap. “Ah! I see you do. That’s right! I always carry them
about with me for the children. And I always say, ‘Don’t crack nuts
with your teeth;’ and they always do it, just the same as if I hadn’t
spoken, as Max is doing now.”

“What is that in your bag?” asked Max, boldly, pointing to a great
sack which October had thrown down on entering.

“Samples,” replied October, briskly. “You see, I belong to a firm
of dyers,--a celebrated one,--‘Brown October & Co.’ These are our
novelties for the season. Look!” And, seizing the bag by the bottom, he
shook out upon the floor what seemed to be rainbows in confusion,--a
vast heap of brilliant scraps, so vivid and so various that nobody
could count the different tints.

“Two billion new shades,” went on October, triumphantly; “all patented,
warranted to wash, and unlike any thing seen in the shop last year.
Where is the mortal dyer, outside our firm, who can say that?” Then he
began cramming the samples into the bag again. When order was restored,
he turned toward Grandfather’s chair, and said in a gentle voice,
“Would you like to hear one more story from me, old friend, before you
and I part for ever?”

Grandfather nodded his head. “You used to tell nice ones to Carl and
me,” he answered. “One more! one more!”

So October began:--

“It’s about squirrels. People generally don’t appreciate squirrels.
They overlook them entirely, or else they make pies of them, which is
unjust and disagreeable.

“I know them well, so they talk freely before me, and let out their
secrets, which people never do until they are intimate. All the best
circles of squirreldom are open to me; and the Nutcrackers, who are
perhaps the most aristocratic family in the set, are my particular
friends, and have been for generations.

“It is about Nippy Nutcracker that I am going to tell. It is a true
story; and I hope it may be a warning to you, Thekla, and to other
young females of your age.

“Nippy, in her earliest squirrelhood, was one of the prettiest
creatures I ever saw. In those days she spelt the name ‘Nippie,’ and
had it thus engraved in monogram on the birch-bark cards she was in
the habit of leaving at the nests of her acquaintances. Later, she
changed it again to plain ‘Nippy;’ and the other squirrels agreed it
was just as well she should,--for reasons.

“A fashionable belle of the first water was Nippie,--slender, graceful,
bewitching,--with a most beautiful long tail, which she put up in hot
pine-needles every night, and fluffed out in the morning till it stood
like a glory round her head when she waved it. And this she did very
often, especially when desirable bachelor squirrels were about. All
the Nutcrackers were beside themselves with pride over the possession
of this lovely creature. Distinguished suitors came from far and near,
bringing such gifts of beech-nuts, acorns, and toothsome walnut-meats
all picked out of the shells, that Nippie’s bower used to look like
a provision-market. But to none of her lovers did she give any
encouragement; for her secret heart was set upon King Nutcracker, the
chief of her tribe.

“This mighty monarch was getting on in years; but he possessed great
gallantry of manner, and had been heard to say that never within his
experience did so lovely a vision as Miss Nutcracker alight on earthly
bough. This speech fired Nippie’s ambitious heart: which was unlucky;
for, as it happened, King Nutcracker already possessed a spouse, of
his own age, to whom, in spite of his fine speeches, he was at bottom
quite devoted. They lived in the top of a royal oak, their children
occupying neighboring branches; and, as each year some eight or ten
fresh princes and princesses entered the world, the family circle, as
can be imagined, was a large one.

“The Queen was plain and old-fashioned. She never curled her tail, and
thought hot pine-needles absolutely sinful. But she had a resolute
character and great strength of constitution; and did not feel the
least desire to die and make room for Nippie, if she could possibly
help it. All things considered, therefore, the chance did not seem
very good. But Nippie clung to hope. Queen Nutcracker, she reflected,
_must_ drop off some day; and the King would naturally look to the
fairest as her successor. ‘Queen Nippie’ sounded well;--she would
refurnish the royal nest, and astonish society. It was worth waiting
for. So she waited.

“One year--two, three, four. Lovers came, and went; Nippie snubbing
them all right royally. Still Queen Nutcracker lived and flourished;
and still every spring eight or ten lovely princes and princesses
appeared to swell the population of the royal oak. Five years--six.
Nippie’s resplendent tail began to look thin, and a little worn.
Hot pine-needles are very bad for tails, they say. She lost a front
tooth; her nose grew sharp; and her figure, once so graceful, was now
painfully thin. Suitors became weary of the Nutcracker beech, and the
few who showed themselves were mere children, on the look-out for some
younger Nutcrackers who were growing up. Nippie felt that her day was
past; that the sun was ceasing to shine, and her hay not made; and, as
the conviction forced itself upon her mind, her temper waxed horribly
uneven. She took to shutting herself into her hole, and having nervous
attacks; and when these were on, she would say the sharpest and most
disagreeable things to her nearest relations.

“This of course did not add to the happiness of the family. Her
nephews and nieces--full of spirits, and selfish, like all young
creatures--pronounced her in private ‘a dreadful old cat,’ and took
pleasure in teasing her, laughing at her little airs and graces, and
alluding to her age in the most unfeeling way. Even her brothers and
sisters, tired out by her tantrums, did not stand up for her as they
ought. So life seemed pretty hard to poor Nippie; and there were
moments when she wished herself made into pie, and an end put to every
thing.

“But this was during the betwixt-and-between period which comes to
everybody some time or other. For Nippie was not the sort of squirrel
to settle down into insignificance without at least making a good fight
for herself. She had failed as a beauty; but it was still possible
to succeed as something else. She was not long in deciding what this
should be. She would become ‘strong-minded.’

“Her first step was leaving off the ‘ie’ from her name. Nicknames, she
declared, especially those ending in _ie_, were silly and affected.
As she had been privately spoken of as ‘Nip’ for some time past among
her young relations, no one made the least objection to the change.
So Nippie the belle became plain Nippy; and soon after, to the
astonishment of her friends, beech-leaves began to circulate about,
bearing the name of ‘Dr. Nutcracker,’ and it was announced that Nippy
had adopted the practice of medicine.

“This, however, was another failure, and did not last long. Nippy began
in a small way with a remedy of her own invention, which she called
‘acorn-water,’ and which consisted of portions of a neighboring brook
upon which the shadow of an acorn had been allowed to lie for two
hours and twenty minutes by the sun. But most of the squirrels laughed
at the new medicine, and declared that it did them no good; while
the few who believed injured the water almost as much, by calling it
dangerously strong. At last one very nervous old lady, Mrs. Hopper by
name, was thrown into a fit by finding out, two days afterward, that
she had by mistake swallowed half a drop more than the right dose; and
after that nobody dared to try any more. So, upon the whole, Nippy
decided not to be a Doctress, but something else. She took a week to
think it over, and then startled the whole community by the following
placard:--

           Miss N. Nutcracker,
     the Celebrated Philosopheress,
     will lecture at Beech-tree Hall
    on Thursday, at 5 P.M. precisely.

                Subject:
  “Why should not Squirrels lay Eggs?”
        Admission, 25 beech-nuts.
        Reserved seats, 2 acorns.
          Children, half-price.

“Nothing can describe the excitement caused by this announcement, which
was inscribed on a huge moose-wood leaf, and pinned with thorns to
the royal oak. No lady-squirrel had ever before appeared on a public
platform, and all the old fogies felt that it was the beginning of
great changes. Everybody wanted to go, however, especially when the
King sent down a servant with both cheeks stuffed full of acorns, and
engaged the best seats for himself and party. When the hour came, there
was hardly standing-room left on the Nutcracker beech. Nippy took her
station on the top bough, with the utmost dignity of manner. There
was nothing left of the flirting, foolish ways of the ex-belle. Her
poor thin tail was screwed tightly into a French twist. She wore a
plain gray gown, and black gloves. She had practised speaking with her
mouth full of nuts so long, that every word she uttered could be heard
distinctly; and I assure you her audience listened with both eyes and
ears.

“I’m sorry that I cannot remember the lecture,” continued October;
“for it was very fine. Nippy took the ground that as squirrels live
in trees, and so do birds;--and as squirrels make nests, and so do
birds;--and as squirrels have tails, and birds the same,--so it was
the duty of squirrels to lay eggs, just as much as it was the duty of
birds. Everybody applauded and agreed, but didn’t very well know how
to do any thing more about it. So, after all, the lecture produced no
practical result, except by making a great deal of talk.

“But this was precisely what Miss Nutcracker wished. She felt that
her enterprise was succeeding, and that a glorious future lay before
her. Other lectures followed. There was one on ‘Food;’ one on ‘What
to do with the Shells?’ another on ‘Hygiene’ (which the average
squirrel persisted in calling ‘High Jinks,’ and treating accordingly);
and a fourth on ‘The New Departure,’ which meant the removal of the
Nutcracker tribe to another tree, with more nuts on it. But the most
famous lecture of all was announced to be ‘for ladies only’ and its
subject was ‘The Wrongs of Squirrelesses.’

“Nippy told her audience (which they had not known before) that they
had always been abused and unhappy. She reminded them with great
eloquence how the largest nuts were apt to fall to the lot of the male
squirrels, who were usually up and at work early of mornings, while
their wives slept; how fathers of families were apt to go sky-larking
off into the woods, leaving their partners at home with nests full
of little ones; how they came back late at night and disturbed the
house; and many other things. So pathetic was the picture that, before
the lecture ended, most of the company were in tears. The gentlemen,
who had been sitting in distant trees meanwhile, trying to look as if
they didn’t know that any thing was going on, but secretly wild with
curiosity, were confounded when, at the end of the discourse, all the
squirrelesses came trooping home slowly and sadly, with tails in their
eyes, and not a skip or bound among them. That night nothing but sobs
and recriminations were heard among the boughs. Even the royal oak
caught the infection. The princes and princesses were disputing and
scolding right and left; and nobody kept their good humor except the
sensible old Queen, who had refused to attend the lecture.

“‘Shut up, and go to sleep!’ she exclaimed at last. ‘You are a parcel
of nonsensical fools. Since I became a squirrel I never heard of any
thing so ridiculous; and if I had my way, that Nippy Nutcracker should
be made into a fricassee by noon to-morrow, before she has time to do
more mischief.’

“But vainly did the royal dame utter her homely wisdom. Nippy, sporting
in unfricasseed freedom, with the whole range of social abuses before
her, was more than a match for the aged Queen, to whom nobody listened
for a moment. The next week the lecture was ‘Repeated by Request.’
Others followed, of a still more dangerous character; such as, ‘Frisk
in Fetters,’ and ‘Why are Incisors granted to Both Sexes?’ A dreadful
little ballad was composed, and sung by the strong-minded, whose number
became daily larger and more formidable. I remember only a fragment,
but it gives an idea of the whole:--

  ‘Who would stay and mind her young,
  Who would gladly hold her tongue,
  Who before her lord be dumb,
        Let her turn and flee.

  ‘Let her turn in cage of tin,
  Clattering with revolving din;
  Grazing fur and grazing skin,
        Good enough for she!’

“The grammar,” said October, “is defective, you observe. But
that is little. Grammar and all other rules are defied by the
strong-minded,--when they happen to be squirrels.

“This was last autumn. Just as I left, a lecture was announced upon
‘The Royal Family an Excrescence!’ What the state of affairs may
be now I do not know, and I dare not guess. I confess that it is
with reluctance that I return to the grove. From what I know of Miss
Nutcracker, it would not surprise me to find all the old pleasant state
of things changed, the King and Queen in exile, a Republic proclaimed,
and Nippy at the head of affairs as Provisional Governess!”

Grandfather had been as much entertained at the story as any one.
Listening, his face grew young again, his laugh mingled with the merry
peals from Max and Thekla, and was almost as gay in sound. But, as
October drew to a close, he seemed to become weary; and, when the last
words were spoken, they looked at him, and he was fast asleep.

“Better so,” whispered October. “He will miss me less.”

In silence he measured his moments from the can; silently bent over the
white head, and touched it with his lips; and on tiptoe stole from the
room.

The children followed noiselessly.

“That story didn’t really have any end, did it?” said Thekla, when they
were outside.

“No,” replied October, “there is no use trying to put ends to things
which have Nippy Nutcrackers mixed up with them.”

[Illustration: “A fashionable belle of the first water was Nippie.”]




CHAPTER XI.

“CHUSEY.”


When the children stole back again into the hut after October had
gone, Grandfather was still asleep. But before long he roused himself
suddenly, rubbed his eyes, and stared at them in a strange, bewildered
way.

“Where is Carl?” he said. “Has he hidden himself to plague me? I know
he loves to tease, but this is too bad.”

“Grandfather,” said Thekla, gently, “you are not quite waked up yet. It
was only a dream! There is nobody here but Max and me.”

The old man looked wildly at her for a moment. Then he came to himself,
smiled, and stroked her hair. “So,” he said, “only Max and you,
Liebchen! Well, it was a nice dream while it lasted; and now I will go
to bed.”

[Illustration: “‘We don’t want our Chusey killed--we don’t want him
for dinner--we don’t like turkeys when they’re d-e-a-d,’ sobbed the
children.”]

So Grandfather went to bed. But neither the next day, nor the next,
nor the next, did he rise; and soon it became an accepted fact that
Grandfather did not care to get up any more. He had no pain, and smiled
often; but he seldom spoke, and when he did it was of old times, which
seemed to be fresher to his mind than the things which were about him.
Thekla moved her wheel indoors, and sat where his eyes could rest upon
her the moment he waked; while Max, laying aside all his boyish frisk
and bounce, moved about the cottage with steps gentle as a girl’s. And
so, quietly and rather sadly, the month wore away.

The last evening proved a fierce and gusty one. Amid the pauses of the
wind a soft whirring sound as of wings beating outside could be heard.
It came from great heaps of rustling leaves driven against the cottage
walls by the blast. No other noise broke the stillness, except the
crackling of a pine fagot upon the fire, which filled the room with
light and fragrance. Thekla and Max sat silently beside the blaze;--the
Grandfather slept. It was so long since either had spoken, that when
at last a sharp knock fell upon the door both the children jumped from
their seats.

Max hastened to open, and to make a polite bow to the new-comer, while
Thekla brought a chair. November, a rough looking personage in a gray
pea-jacket and flapped hat, took it without ceremony, only saying, “All
right,” in a gruff voice. He seemed so big and strong that the boy and
girl felt timid. They drew nearer each other, and were not sure exactly
how to begin. But when November took off his hat, which he did pretty
soon, the face he showed was a kind one, in spite of the rough beard
and wild hair, which had evidently not been combed for years, if ever.
It was a brown and weather-beaten face; but the eyes were full of that
friendly light which children love, and the little ones no longer felt
afraid. November looked at them for a moment from under his shaggy
eyebrows, and then began fumbling with the knots of a red bandanna
handkerchief in which something was tied up.

“There!” he said, when at last he got it open, “there’s my present.
It came from ever so far away, and a fine piece of work I had to keep
it from being smashed on the road. It’s all safe however, I believe,
except the edges, which are a little chipped. But that’s nothing. Get
your knives and forks, young ones, and fall to.”

This present was a pie,--a fine yellow pie, mottled with brown spots
and baked in a red earthenware dish. Max and Thekla had never seen any
thing like it before. It felt still warm from the oven; and smelt so
delicious and spicy, that it was impossible to keep from eating it at
once, as November urged them to do. So Max ran for two horn spoons;
and, after a piece was laid aside for Grandfather, he and Thekla began
to devour the rest.

“Oh my!” said Max, as he took his first bite, “isn’t it good?”

“Won’t you have a bit, sir?” asked Thekla, who was a polite little
creature.

“Bless you!--no,” replied November, who looked highly pleased at the
success of his gift. “I never eat ’em till the proper time comes, and
that isn’t for three weeks yet. But I know an old lady who persists in
making them all the year round, in season and out; and as I thought a
pie would be something new, and a good thing to bring, I dropped in on
the way here and stole one from her buttery. They were just whipping
the cat for the theft as I came away.”

“But wasn’t that wrong?” asked Max, with his mouth full of the pie.

“Um!” replied November, with a keen, funny look, “if I had squeezed it
into a _can_ now, and smashed it, perhaps it might have been called so!”

Max blushed, and hung down his head.

“Never mind,” went on November, more kindly. “We won’t discuss the
point of our respective honesties, I think! But I must confess that we
Months are not as conscientious as we should be. Every one of us steal
something wherever we go; and the worst of it is, that we never bring
what we steal back again. Heigho!” And he looked silently into the fire
for some time.

By this the last mouthful of pie had disappeared; and Thekla had
carried off the dish and the spoons, and put them out of sight.

“Was it good?” asked November, meeting her eye with a smile.

“Very, very good,” she answered. “I never tasted any pies like it. Do
you know what it is made of, sir?”

“I believe,” said November, “the exact recipe runs thus: ‘As little
pumpkin as possible, and as much of every thing else as possible.’ But
it’s no use your trying to make one. They don’t succeed anywhere except
in that country on the other side the ocean, where this came from.
There they have a knack at ’em.”

“Oh, tell us about the other side the ocean!” cried the children.

“I’m going to,” replied November. “That’s where my story happened.

“It was way out on the Western frontier--Do you know what a frontier
is?” suddenly interrupting himself.

No, the children did not know what a frontier was.

“A frontier,” continued November, “is the edge of civilization; and
rough and shaggy enough it is, as edges are apt to be. It is the
battle-ground where men and Nature meet and fight it out. Ah! the
men have hard times there, I can tell you. They have to turn to and
use every bit of stuff that is in them, or they get the worst of the
conflict. But Nature is a friendly foe. When she has proved them, she
grows kind. The trees fall, the stumps come out of the ground. Every
year the work done tells more and more; and the frontier is pushed
farther and farther away. By and by there won’t be any frontier left,
the whole land will be civilized; and people will have every thing they
desire,--brick houses, churches, shops, ice-cream saloons, and copies
of Tupper’s Proverbial Philosophy.

“Well, I always visit this frontier as I go my yearly rounds; and it
was there that I made acquaintance with Mrs. Fiske’s little children.

“Four boys and girls there were, the eldest seven, the youngest not
quite three; and none of them had ever seen other children except
themselves. Their Mother was a sad, hard-worked woman; their Father, a
rough, kind-hearted fellow, too busy to notice the little ones much,
except now and then on a Sunday evening. So the children were left
entirely to each other for amusement; and they seemed to find plenty
of it, for a more merry, contented group I never saw. The rude hut in
which they lived was beautiful in their eyes; and the forest, with its
birds, berries, squirrels, and flowers, like a delightful playfellow.

“The cabin was off the road for wagon trains: none ever came there.
But now and then men on horseback, two or three together, would stop
and ask for a meal or a night’s lodging. These were never refused in
that hospitable wilderness. The children were glad when this happened;
for the men talked about all sorts of interesting things, and brought
newspapers, from which their Father read stories and anecdotes. But
Polly, the eldest, a bright, observing girl, noticed that after these
visits her Mother always looked sadder than before, and sometimes cried.

“Mrs. Fiske came from a State a long way off called Massachusetts.
Some of her relations lived there still, and there was the old house
where she had been born; but she seldom spoke of it or them. Perhaps
she feared to make the children discontented with their lonely life by
doing so; and it may be she was wise.

“But the little ones picked up ideas here and there, and made a sort of
play of ‘Going to the East,’ where so many wonderful things were. They
did not often tell their Mother of these plays: somehow they felt that
it gave her pain; but when they were alone with their Father they would
talk by the hour, asking questions, and chattering all together like a
flock of small crows.

“One night a traveller, who was stopping with them, used a new word.

“‘I don’t know if _Thanksgiving_ gets so far out as this,’ he said.

“Mrs. Fiske only answered by a sigh; but her husband replied, ‘Well,
no! We’ve had pretty hard times for a spell back; and we never see no
newspapers so’s to know what day’s appointed, and so we’ve kind of let
it slide. It’s a pity too, that’s a fact. Why, the kids here don’t even
know what Thanksgiving means.’”

“Kids?” asked Max, wonderingly.

“He meant the children,” laughed November. “It’s rather a funny word,
but some people use it; and as long as it tells what it means it’s a
good word. The little Fiskes were used to it.

“‘Well,’ the traveller went on, ‘you shan’t miss the Day this year for
want of a paper any how. There’s the “Democrat” of week before last,
with the Governor’s Proclamation and all. It’s the 29th you see, four
weeks from to-morrow.’

“‘What does Thanksgiving mean?’ asked little Nanny, who was perched on
the stranger’s knee. ‘Tell us the ’tory about it.’

“So the traveller, who was a kind man, made quite a story to amuse
the children. He told how, long ago, when the land was all wild woods
in which only Indians lived, a shipload of English people came across
the sea, in the freezing winter, to make a home for themselves in the
wilderness. How they suffered hunger, cold, and all sorts of hardships:
and at last, after many months, housed their first harvest from a few
scanty fields; and, in gratitude for this food which saved them from
starvation, set aside a day to be spent in giving God thanks for it.
And how, ever since, among their descendants, this day of Thanksgiving
had been kept up, and solemnly observed every autumn after the
gathering in of the crops.

“Then he told them that in New England, on this day, all the sons
and daughters come to the old homestead with their families; and
how the long dinner-tables are set out with good things,--turkeys,
pumpkin pies, cranberry sauce, and Indian pudding. And then, last of
all, he drew from his pocket a paper, and read aloud the Governor’s
Proclamation, calling on all citizens to observe the 29th of November
as Thanksgiving Day.

“Before the stranger had finished the children were wild with
excitement. But their Mother buried her face in her apron, and sobbed
bitterly. That night, after the traveller had gone to bed, she talked
more about her old home than ever she had done before, and told Polly a
great many things of Massachusetts and its people.

“All the next day the children could think of nothing but the
stranger’s wonderful story. Why couldn’t they have Thanksgiving too?
they asked their Mother. The Governor said they might.

“‘But we haven’t any thing to keep it with,’ said Mrs. Fiske.

“Oh, yes! there was one big squash left. Wouldn’t Mother make some
pies out of it for them?

“‘But there are no eggs, or ginger, or lemon-peel,’ answered the poor,
discouraged Mother.

“However, the children begged so hard, that at last she said she
_would_ try to make some pies. But then Thanksgiving was nothing
without a turkey.

“‘Oh, if we only had a turkey!’ cried the little ones.

“I happened to come by that day as they were talking; and it seemed to
me rather a pity if, in a land full of turkeys, the Fiskes couldn’t
have just one to make merry with. So I cast about in my mind for some
way of securing a dinner for them. At last I found it. Forty miles off,
through the woods, there lived a rich settler, who I knew kept turkeys.
His wife had been lucky that year, and had raised a fine brood. There
were at least twenty.

“Among these was one little gobbler, a real vagabond by nature, who
was always running off into the forest. His drumsticks were rather
toughish from being so much on his legs, but otherwise he was a good
fat bird; and, as it was his evident fate to be lost some day, I
thought my little friends might as well have the benefit of him as some
wildcat or fox. So I watched my chance; and, catching him a long way
from home, I headed him in the right direction, and began to drive him
toward the Fiskes’ cottage.”

Here Thekla rose, and stole on tiptoe into Grandfather’s room; for
she fancied that he called. But the old man slept peacefully, and she
returned again quietly as she went. November had paused in his story
till she should come back.

“Such a time as I had!” he resumed. “The turkey seemed to know my
intention, and to be resolved to spite me. Twenty times, at least,
he got away, and, gobbling with joy, began to run toward home. Twice
I rescued him from a fox, once dragged him from the very jaws of an
opossum. Nothing but my love for the children induced me to go through
the task; and I was glad and thankful enough when at last the journey
was over, and we arrived safely at the clearing.

“Little Zeke spied him first. ‘Oh, what a big birdie!’ he cried, and
made a rush at him. The turkey was too tired to run far, so in a few
moments Zeke had him tied by the leg to a tree.

“‘Mother! Polly! Nanny! Baby!’ he screamed. ‘Come and see what I’ve
got!’

“All came flocking at the call. ‘Why, it’s a turkey!’ exclaimed Mrs.
Fiske,--‘and a real tame turkey, not a wild one at all!’

“‘It’s come for Thanksgiving!’ shouted Polly. ‘Hurrah! hurrah! now
we’ll have it for dinner.’

“‘Gobble, gobble, gobble,’ said the turkey.

“‘Why, so we will, old fellow!’ replied Zeke.

“By general consent the turkey was fastened in a corner of the kitchen,
by a string round his leg. He thus became a part of the family. The
children were very fond of him. They stuffed him all day long with
bread-crumbs, doughnuts, bits of meat, and other dainties; so, though
he missed his usual exercise, he was a happy and contented turkey, and
soon grew so fat that Mrs. Fiske said he would make a splendid dinner.

“‘Massachusetts’ was the name chosen for him, but it was shortened to
‘Chusey’ because that was easier. Before long he had become wonderfully
tame. He would run to the end of his string to greet the family, when
they came down in the morning; he ate from the children’s hands, and
let the baby stroke and ruffle his feathers with her soft fingers as
much as she liked.

“Little did the poor fellow guess that the young friends whom he
welcomed so gladly were already arranging among themselves how to
divide the choice bits of his carcass. Zeke had spoken for one
wish-bone, and Polly for the other; Nanny was resolute as to the
possession of his tail; and Pop, the baby, was to have a drumstick
to suck. All had requested large helps of the breast and plenty of
gravy. But, as time went on, the Mother noticed that this savory future
was less talked about, and that Nanny and Polly were often to be seen
patting the turkey’s back, and calling him ‘Poor Chusey!’ in a pathetic
manner.

“At last the great day drew near. The pies were made,--rather singular
as to looks, I confess, and a good deal more like porridge than
pie, but not at all bad notwithstanding. Mrs. Fiske had picked some
wild cranberries, and stewed them with maple sugar. A fine pile of
mealy potatoes was chosen and washed. Nothing remained but to kill
Massachusetts, and prepare him for the spit.

“‘I’ll attend to it when I come home to-night,’ said Mr. Fiske.

“So, when his work was done, he sharpened a hatchet, and brought it
with him ready for the bloody deed. But, lo! and behold, there on the
floor were the four children, sitting round their beloved Chusey. They
were all crying; and, at the sight of his Father, Pop gave a shriek.

“‘Naughty, naughty!’ he said, and pushed with his little hands. ‘Go
’way, Daddy,--go ’way!’

“‘What’s the matter?’ asked Mr. Fiske, very much astonished.

“‘We don’t want our Chusey killed--we don’t want him for dinner!’
sobbed the children. ‘We love him so much! We don’t like turkeys when
they’re d-e-a-d!’ And again the baby broke in with, ‘Go ’way, naughty!
go ’way.’”

“‘Well, if ever I see the beat of that!’ cried the Father. ‘It did seem
as if that turkey was sent a-purpose, and here you are cutting up like
this!’

“But the children would not listen to any objections. Chusey was their
turkey, they said; they loved him, and he should not be eaten.

“‘He’s just as much right to Thanksgiving as we have,’ asserted Zeke.
‘He’s “a citizen,” and we mean to give him some of the pie.’

“So the programme was suddenly changed. Instead of making a figure
_on_ the table, Massachusetts came _to_ the table, and was one of the
company. Tied to Pop’s chair, he was regaled with all sorts of choice
morsels. The family dined on salt pork and venison, with cranberry
sauce and pumpkin porridge; but, though the fare was rather queer, few
happier dinners were eaten that day anywhere. Even Mrs. Fiske came out
of her clouds, and was jolly. As for ‘Chusey,’ he gobbled and clucked
and chuckled, enjoyed the jokes as much as any one, and seemed to enter
fully into the spirit of the occasion.”

“How nice that was!” said warm-hearted Thekla, as November ended. “I
love the children for not eating Chusey.”

“So do I,” replied November, heartily; “and this year I mean they
shall have something very nice. It’s getting to be a little less
frontier-like out there, and I think I see my way.”

“Oh, tell us what!” cried Max.

But November shook his head. “Never spoil your eggs by chipping the
shells too soon,” said he. “I know how to keep a secret. And now let’s
have that can of yours, and I’ll take my moments; for I’m late, and
must be off.”

He tied the moments in the red bandanna handkerchief, shook hands in a
friendly way, and without another word was gone.

“Oh, isn’t he nice!” said Thekla.

[Illustration: “Chusey came to the table, and, tied to Pop’s chair, was
regaled with all sorts of choice morsels.”]




CHAPTER XII.

HOW THE CAT KEPT CHRISTMAS.


And now the last evening of November was come; and Winter, stealing a
march on the departing Autumn, let loose, as if in a hurry to begin,
his first storm upon the world. Strong winds raged in the Forest,
driving the leaves in clouds before them, and snapping and rending the
patient, tortured trees. Ink-black clouds scared away the Moon, when
she tried to shine; sharp sleet struck the windows of the Woodman’s
hut, like a myriad of tiny fists; and the blast wailed and moaned about
the chimney, like the voice of one in pain.

Max and Thekla heard the uproar, and trembled, as they sat by the fire.
Often before had they listened to storms with a certain pleasurable
sense that home was rendered snugger by the contrast. But now they
shivered and clung together, and tears were in Thekla’s eyes as she
nestled her head upon her brother’s shoulder. The kitchen did not wear
its usual cheery look. And no wonder! There was sorrow in the cottage;
for dear old Grandfather, who had loved them both so fondly, and been
so loved in return, was gone away for ever!

[Illustration: “So the Cat told her story. ‘And for a wish,’ she said,
‘if your Saintship would only permit me to slip in under your furs, and
go along,’--‘Why, jump in at once,’ said St. Nicholas.”]

Only a week before he had died, quietly, painlessly, with a smile on
his lips, and blessing them at the last. The far-away neighbors had
assembled; and with pitying looks and kind words had taken the aged
form, and laid it to rest beside other graves where slept the friends
of his youth. But still, in spite of the lonely house and the vacant
chair, Thekla could not feel that Grandfather was far away; and every
hour she silently did this thing or that because it would once have
pleased him to have them done, and the thought that he still knew and
was pleased comforted her. And perhaps Thekla was right in her innocent
faith, for the friends we can no longer see may be nearer to us than we
think.

When an old tree is blown down, all the delicate grasses and sweet
herbs which cluster at its foot are uprooted by the shock. So it was
with these two little human flowers. The fall of their sheltering
friend tore them from their accustomed place. Already the neighbors had
talked over and settled what the children must do. Max was to be bound
apprentice to a clockmaker in the distant town, and Thekla to live with
a farmer’s dame who had offered to take and train her as a servant. The
thought of parting was dreadful to them; and they had begged so hard
and so tearfully to be allowed to stay together in the hut for a few
weeks longer,--just till a new Ranger should take possession,--that at
last, won by their distress, consent was given. There was wood and meal
and vegetables enough in the cellar to keep them without expense to
anybody. If the poor things liked to eat the stores themselves, instead
of selling them, why it was a good plan, people said. So there the two
sat on this stormy evening, alone in the lonely Forest, and expecting
the arrival of December, last of that wonderful company who had made
the year so strangely interesting.

They had not long to wait. There came a lull in the wind, and far off
in the distance a voice was heard raised in a commanding tone, and
gradually drawing nearer.

“There! there!” were the first words they caught: “that will do. Leave
the oaks alone, you rascals! Time enough for such pranks when I’m gone.
As for that hemlock,--winds will be winds, I know, and what’s done can
never be undone; but don’t let me catch you at another.” Here the voice
ceased; then there was a rattling at the latch, and next moment the
door opened, and in came a tall figure leaning on a staff, but moving
so lightly and easily that it suggested any thing rather than age or
infirmity.

This was December, a fine, stately man, dressed in white and green,
with a fur cloak flung about his shoulders and a hat decked with holly
sprigs. Age and youth seemed funnily contrasted in his face; for,
while hair and beard were white as hoar-frost, the cheeks were like
ripe winter-apples, and the blue eyes sparkled with fun and fire. He
entered with a sort of jolly rush; but, when he saw Thekla’s black
frock and the traces of tears upon her cheeks, his mood changed at
once. Closing the door gently, he sat down before the fire, and,
holding out his hand with an expression of indescribable kindness, said
in a tone full of sympathy, “My poor children!”

That was all: but in another moment Thekla’s arm was round his neck on
one side, and Max’s on the other;--he had drawn them on to his knees,
and they were sobbing out their griefs as if they had known him always.
They told how sorry they were to part, how lonely the cottage seemed,
how forlorn it was to be poor and at the mercy of others; and December
listened, his eyes glistening with pity and his kind arms hugging them
close. It was like having Grandfather back again, the children thought.

The new friend was wise. He did not interrupt or try to comfort till
they had got quite through. It was wonderful what relief came just from
telling all to somebody who cared to listen. By the time the story was
over the boy and girl felt happier than for days; and not till then did
December speak.

“Courage!” he said. “It’s always darkest just before day. Why, the
Lord takes care of birds and cats and squirrels, of a whole world
full of tiny winged creatures, and all the fishes of the sea. Do you
suppose he will forget just you two, out of all the little ones whom he
protects? Never! Why, I _could_ tell you,--but I must not, it is not
permitted,--only, even a Month may venture on a hint, and so I’ll just
say, wait, and see what’s ahead!” And December ended this mysterious
sentence with pursing up his lips very tight, winking hard with both
eyes, and nodding his head in a singular and provoking manner.

“Oh, what?” cried the children.

“I shan’t say another word,” replied December. “No! you needn’t
look at me with such big, imploring eyes: it’s no use. But just you
keep up brave hearts, and trust in God,--and you’ll see! As for the
Grandfather,” here his voice grew deep and solemn, like the sound of
bells, “I know you miss him sorely; but don’t cry for him any more. He
has gone where he is young again; and, when your turn comes to go too,
you will wonder that ever you shed a tear because he was made so very
happy.”

December’s face became beautiful as he spoke these last words, and
Thekla stole the other arm tenderly about his neck. A glittering
chain hung there, with pendants shaped like icicles. Touching it, she
started, it was so very cold.

“Is it made of ice?” she asked.

“Well, you can call it so, if you like,” responded December, smiling;
“but I say ‘crystallized gases.’ It sounds better, I think.

“I hope it won’t put you out,” he went on, “if I should ask leave to
_read_ my story, instead of telling it. I am so very, _very_ old, you
see,”--here his eyes twinkled with fun,--“that my memory is almost
gone; and, unless I write things down, I am always forgetting them.”
Whereupon he pulled a roll of paper from his pocket, and perching a
pair of spectacles with tortoise-shell rims on his nose, very high up,
looked from under them at the children in a comical manner. Thekla and
Max could not help laughing. In spite of his white hair, it seemed
somehow a great joke that December should call himself so very, very
old.

“It’s a cheerful kind of a story,” continued he. “I picked it out
on purpose, for I guessed I should find you moping; and I thought
something lively would be good for you.”

Thus speaking, December pushed the glasses up higher on his forehead,
so as to be able to see well from beneath them, and began to read,--

  “HOW THE CAT KEPT CHRISTMAS.”

“What a queer name for a story!” said Thekla.

“Yes; and it was a queer Cat too,” replied December. “I knew her.
Tortoise-shell, with long whiskers, and rather a ragged tail.”

Then he went on.

“The ringers were practising the Christmas chimes in low, muffled
tones. High up, the steeple rocked in the wind, the clouds drifted
rapidly over the moon, and clear and sharp the frost-film glittered on
the roofs. The watchman on his round clapped and stamped to warm hands
and feet, as he called the hour, ‘Eight o’clock, and all’s well!’ But,
to the poor Cat crouched beneath the kitchen-window, all was _not_ well.

“‘Oh dear!’ she sighed to herself, ‘what a thing it is to have a
Step-mother! Once we were happy! The good Papa loved me, and I slept
in Gretchen’s arms. The fire was bright in those days. Porringers of
hot milk stood by it, and always a saucer full for me. Ah, dear days!
The moment I saw that nose of hers, I knew they were over! Such a nose!
so red, so long. Why did the Papa marry her? Men are _so_ foolish. I
hissed, I spit, I warned,--nobody listened, and here I am. The good
Papa dares not protect me. Gretchen weeps: the Step-dame bars the
door. Hew! what a wind! What a Christmas Eve! Poor Gretchen! Poor me!’
Overcome by her sorrows, the Cat gave a loud wail, which rang out into
the chilly night. Then the door opened softly.

“‘Puss! puss!’ said a small voice, ‘where are you?’

“Pussy ran forward into view, and jumped and leaped at her mistress.

“‘Oh, my Katchen,’ went on the little one, ‘how cold it is! You will
freeze! you will die. Oh, if I dared but let you in!’

“‘I’ll scratch her eyes out!’ muttered the Cat.

“‘Shall I throw my little red shawl to you from the window?’ continued
Gretchen. ‘My poor one! my Kitty!’

“‘Gretchen!’ screamed a voice, ‘if you let that good-for-nothing Cat
into the house, you taste the stick! Dost hear?’

“Gretchen turned pale. ‘O Kitty!’ was all she said. She gave a sob of
despair. Then the door was shut.

“‘This is a nice business,’ thought the Cat. ‘Oh, the witch! I hope the
mice will come down to-night, and steal the very teeth out of her head.
But I’ll have vengeance yet. There’s that big gray rat in the cellar:
I’ll strike a bargain with him,--life and liberty, provided he plagues
her to death, eats the linen, claws the jam, gnaws bung-holes in the
cask, and lets the beer out! We’ll see! Meantime, I shall freeze unless
something is done. Let me explore.’

“High and low did the Cat search,--over the fence, under the vine,--but
no shelter could be found. The vine was leafless, the fence gave no
hiding-place. At last she bethought herself of the roof, which it was
easy to mount by means of a long and sloping rain-trough. Perhaps there
might be a warm chimney there,--no bad pillow on a wintry night.

“There proved to be a warmish one; and, curling into a ball, Puss laid
herself to rest against it. Perhaps it was not warm enough, perhaps the
remembrance of wrong was too bitter within her; certain it is she could
not sleep. She wriggled, she twisted; she sent forth melancholy cries,
which rang strangely across the icy roofs as if some ghost afflicted
with toothache had gone there for an airing. Nine--ten--eleven--had
sounded before she fell into her first doze,--the clock was on the
stroke of twelve, when a scraping and scratching sound close by roused
her. Was it some other cat? or the big rat from the cellar, scaling
the wall? Raising herself cautiously, after the manner of cats, she
listened.

“No: it was neither rat nor cat. Light hoofs as of goats were climbing
the tiles, bells tinkled, a small sledge came in view. Swift as light
it flew along, paused at the next chimney, and a little old man jumped
out. His face shone in the moonlight like a jolly red apple, his fat
body was wrapped in fur, on his back was a bag. Puss had never seen
him before; but she knew him well. It was St. Nicholas, the patron
saint of Christmas.

“Down the chimney he went, with a motion like a bird’s; up again as
fast. Then advancing, he searched in his bag. His kind face looked
puzzled. The Cat saw his hesitation, and sprang forward.

“‘Well, Puss,’ said the Saint, ‘what cheer?’

“‘Bad,’ said the Cat, no ways abashed at finding herself in such
company. ‘But never mind me, if only you’ve something nice for
Gretchen. _Such_ a dear child, St. Nicholas, and _such_ a step-mother!
Do put your hand in the pouch, and fetch out something pretty for
her,--oh do! there’s a kind Saint!’ And she rubbed her soft fur
coaxingly against his legs.

“‘Ah! a dear child and a step-mother, eh?’ said St. Nicholas. ‘Let me
look again. Certainly! here’s something for Gretchen.--Wo-ho, reindeer!
quiet a moment!’ And down the chimney he whipped, a present in his
hand,--what, the Cat couldn’t see.

“Coming back, ‘Now about yourself?’ he asked, gathering up the reins.
‘What keeps you on the cold roof all night? Something must be done, you
know: matters can’t be left this way. Wish a wish, if you have one. I’m
in a humor for pleasing everybody while I’m about it.’

“So the Cat told her story. ‘And for a wish,’ she said, ‘if your
Saintship would only permit me to slip in under your furs, and
go along, I should be proud and happy. They look very warm and
comfortable. I should sleep; or, if not, it would be most interesting
to watch your Worship at work. And I take very little room,’ she added
piteously.

“‘Is that all? Why, jump in at once,’ said kind St. Nicholas: ‘there is
room for forty cats like you. My sledge is never full. Ho! ho! it would
be a pretty joke if it were!’ And he laughed a jolly laugh.

“So Pussy jumped in. ‘You must let me out in the morning early,’ said
she, ‘because Gretchen will be anxious.’

“‘Oh, yes!’ replied the Saint, smiling queerly, ‘I’ll let you out in
the morning. I’m like a bat, you know, and never fly except by night.’

“Off they went, the magic stillness of the flight broken only by the
tinkling bells. First one chimney, then another; bag after bag full of
toys and sweets; here a doll, there a diamond ring, here only a pair of
warm stockings. Everybody had something, except in a few houses over
whose roofs St. Nicholas paused a moment with a look half sad, half
angry, and left nothing. People lived there who knew him little, and
loved him less.

“Through the air,--more towns,--more villages. Now the sea was below
them, the cold, moon-lit sea. Then again land came in sight,--towers
and steeples, halls and hamlets; and the work began again. A wild
longing to explore seized the Cat. She begged the Saint to take her
down one specially wide chimney on his shoulder. He did so. The
nursery within looked strange and foreign; but the little sleeping
face in bed was like Gretchen’s, and Pussy felt at home. A whole bag
full of presents was left here. And then, hey! presto! they were off
again to countless homes,--to roofs so poor and low that only a Saint
would have thought of visiting them, to stately palaces, to cellars and
toll-gates and lonely attics; at last to a church, dim, and fragrant
with ivy-leaves and twisted evergreen, where their errand was to feed
a robin who had there found shelter, and was sleeping on the topmost
bough. How his beads of eyes sparkled as the Saint awoke him! and
how eagerly he pecked the store of good red berries which were _his_
Christmas present, though he had hung up no stocking, and evidently
expected nothing. To small, to great, to rich and poor alike, the good
Saint had an errand. Little ones smiled in their sleep as he moved by,
birds in hidden coverts twittered and chirped, bells faintly tinkled
and chimed as in dream, the air sent up incense of aromatic smells,
flying fairies made room for the sledge to pass; the world, unconscious
what it did, breathed benediction, and in turn received a blessing as
it slept,--a Christmas blessing.

“Off again. More sea, tumbling and tossed; then a great steamship,
down whose funnel St. Nicholas dropped a parcel or two. Then another
country, with atmosphere heavy with savory scents,--of doughnuts, of
pumpkin pies, of apple turnovers, all of which had been cooked the day
before. These dainties stay on earth, and are eaten; but their smell
goes up into the clouds, and the ghosts dine upon it. The Cat licked
her lips. Flying gives appetite. ‘When morning comes,’ she thought,
‘Gretchen will smuggle me a breakfast.’ But morning was long in coming,
and there were many little ones to serve in that wonderful new land.

“And now, another continent passed, another ocean came in view. Island
after island rose and sank; but the sledge did not stop. Then a shore
was seen, with groves of trees, fan-shaped and curious; with rivers
whose waters bore fleets of strange misshapen boats, in whose masts
hung many-colored lanterns; and cities of odd build, whose spires and
pinnacles were noisy with bells. But neither here did the sledge stop.
Once only it dipped, and deposited a package in a modest dwelling. ‘A
Missionary lives there,’ said the Saint. ‘This is China. Don’t you
smell the tea?’

“On and on for hundred of leagues. No stay, no errand. St. Nicholas
looked sad, for all his round face. ‘So many little children,’ he
muttered, ‘and none of them mine!’ And then he cheered again, as,
reining his deer upon a hut amid the frozen snows of Siberia, he left a
rude toy for an exile’s child. ‘Dear little thing!’ he said, ‘she will
smile in the morning when she wakes.’

“And now the air grew warm and soft. Great cities were below them, and
groves of flowering trees. Some balmy fragrance wrapped the land. A
vast building swept into sight, whose sides and roof and spires were
traced in glittering lines of fire. It was a church hung with lamps.
Odors sweet and heavy met their noses. St. Nicholas sneezed, and shook
his head impatiently. ‘Confound that incense!’ he said. ‘It’s the
loveliest country in the world, only a fellow can’t breathe in it!’ And
then he forgot his discomfort in his work.

“Another country, and more smells,--of burning twigs, pungent and
spicy; of candles just blown out. These set the Cat to coughing; but
St. Nicholas minded them not at all. ‘I like them,’ he declared: ‘I
like every thing about a Christmas-tree,--singed evergreen, smoking
tallow, and all. The sniff of it is like a bouquet of flowers to me.
And the children,--bless them!--how they do enjoy it! _They_ don’t
object to the smell!’ He ended with a chuckle.

“And now the dawn began. The moon grew pale and wan; the stars hid
themselves; dark things took form and shape, and were less dark;
yellow gleams crept up the sky; the world looked more alive. And, among
the roofs over which they were now driving, the Cat spied one which
seemed familiar. It was! There stood the well-known chimney, with the
thin, starved curl of smoke, telling of some one awake within. There
was the little window which was Gretchen’s own. With a mew of delight,
she leaped to the roof. The Saint laughed. ‘Good-by!’ he shouted, shook
his reins, and was off. Whither the Cat knew not, nor could guess; for
where St. Nicholas hides himself during the year is one of the secrets
which no man knows.

“Down the long spout ran Puss, with an airy bound. There was the door;
and close to it she stationed herself, impatient of the opening. She
had not long to wait. In a moment the latch was raised, and a face
peeped timidly out,--Gretchen’s face,--pale and swollen with crying.
When she saw the Cat, she gave a loud scream, and caught her in her
arms.

“‘O Katchen!’ she cried, hugging her close. ‘Where have you been all
this time? I thought you were dead! I did, I did, my Katchen!’

“Pussy stared, as well she might.

“‘All day yesterday,’ went on the little one, ‘and all night long.
I cried and cried,--_how_ I cried, my Kitty! It wasn’t a bit a nice
Christmas, though the Christ-child brought me _such_ a doll! I could
think of nothing but my Katchen, lost all day long.’

“Puss stood bewildered. Were her night’s adventures a dream? Had she
ever studied geography, she might have guessed that chasing morning
round the world is a sure way to lose your reckoning. As it was, she
could only venture on a plaintive, inquiring ‘Mew?’ Hunger was more
engrossing than curiosity. She devoured breakfast, dinner, supper, all
at once. The Stepmother had more reason than ever when she grumbled
at being ‘eaten out of house and home by a beast.’ But Gretchen’s
tears the day before had so moved her Father, that he took courage
to declare that Puss must be restored to her former privileges. Warm
corner, dainty mess, and the protecting arms of her little mistress
became hers again, and are hers to this day.

“And that was St. Nicholas’s Christmas present to the Cat.

“Well,” said December, rolling up the paper, “how do you like my story?”

“So much! oh, so much!” the children cried. “It was almost the nicest
of all.”

“As for my present,” he went on, “I am not going to give you that just
now. It shall come on the Christmas-tree. And mind you look bright, and
greet the Christ-child with a smile, or he will be grieved, and go away
sorrowful.”

“I don’t believe we shall have any tree this year,” said Thekla, sadly.
“There isn’t any thing to put on it. And beside”--but her voice
faltered. Grandfather had always helped to dress the tree.

“Oh, but,” cried December, “this will never do. Why, you _must_
have a tree! Never mind if there isn’t any thing to put on it. The
Christ-child and I will see to that. Now I’ll tell you,--you just cut
a nice fir-bough, and set it here against the door, and I’ll pledge my
word, as an honest Month, that _something_ shall come from outside and
fall upon it. Do you give me your promise that you will?”

They promised,--half doubtful, half believing. And then December asked
for the can, and, turning it upside down, poured out the last particles
of sand.

“Dear! dear!” he said reflectively, “what a blessing that these are not
lost! How the babies would have cried at being forced to go to bed half
an hour sooner on Christmas night! And the Anthem would have been cut
short on the blessed morning too, and the bells been cheated of their
chime. It’s a great mercy I have got them safely back.”

“Good-by! good-by!” cried the children, following him to the door.

He stooped, and kissed both the round faces.

“Good-by!” he said. “Remember Christmas Eve.”

[Illustration: “‘O Katchen!’ she said, ‘where have you been?’”]




CONCLUSION.

WHAT WAS ON THE TREE.


It was with heavy hearts that Max and Thekla prepared on Christmas Eve
to fulfil their promise to the kind Month. Only six days lay between
them and the dreaded separation; for on the New Year the Ranger was to
come, and it was hard to be hopeful and patient while such sorrow drew
near. There was no laughter, no frolic, as they dragged in the great
fir-bough, and set it up against the door where December had directed.
When it was placed, they pulled their stools to the fire and remained
for a while quite silent. Both were thinking of the kind old hands
which last year had hung nuts and apples on the tree, and helped to
light the Christmas candles. There were no tapers now, no filberts, or
green and rosy fruits,--only the fir-bough with its damp, fresh smell,
and themselves sitting sadly beside the hearth.

[Illustration: “Late into the night did they all sit over the fire,
while Fritz told the story of his seven long years of absence.”]

“It is getting late,” said Thekla, at last, throwing on a fresh fagot.
“I suppose the Christ-child has a great, great deal to do.”

“Or perhaps he has forgotten all about us,” added Max, despondingly.

But at that moment, as if to contradict his words, a footstep sounded
at the door. The latch was raised and loudly rattled. “Hallo!” cried
a voice. “Where are you all? Grandfather, children,--show a light,
somebody!” And then the door opened, and plump into the middle of the
tree came a young man, head foremost, as if he had dropped from the
clouds.

For a moment he sat there, the green boughs framing in his ruddy face
and bright yellow hair. Then he picked himself up, and exclaimed,
“Well, there’s a welcome home! I didn’t expect to be made into a
Christmas Angel so soon.--Max!” (wonderingly). “Is it Max? Thekla!--can
it be little Thekla? Why don’t you speak? Don’t you know me? Have you
forgotten Fritz?”

“Fritz!” cried the little ones. “Not _our_ Fritz who went away so long
ago?”

“The very same bad shilling come again,” laughed the big brother,
catching Thekla in his arms and almost squeezing her to death with a
hug. “But why do you look so astonished? Didn’t Grandfather get my
letter? And where is the Grandfather?” beginning to collect himself.
But then he caught the look on Max’s face, and saying “Ah!” he suddenly
turned very pale, and releasing Thekla sat down in the nearest chair.

“When?” he asked at length, raising his face from the hands with which
he had hidden it.

“A month ago,” said Max; but Thekla, putting her arm round on the new
brother’s arm, added softly, in the very words of December, “Don’t be
so sorry, dear Fritz. He has gone where he is young again.”

Late into the night did they all sit over the fire, while Fritz told
the story of his seven long years of absence. It seemed to the children
very exciting; for Fritz had twice been shipwrecked, had seen a
buffalo, and only just escaped being killed by an Indian! He had been
very poor too, and suffered such hardships that he could not bear to
write home the tidings of his ill-luck. But now things were better.
Out on the Western frontier of the United States (here Max and Thekla
smiled at each other and thought of “Chusey”) he had found employment
and kind friends, and managed to save from his wages enough to buy a
little farm. He told of the oaks, the noble rivers, the plentiful food
and rich soil, the splendid colors of the autumn forest.

“And it is your home as well as mine,” continued Fritz. “I came back on
purpose to fetch you. Oh! if Grandfather had but lived to see the day!
Max shall work on the farm with me; and before he knows it he will have
earned one of his own. And you, my fairy, shall keep house for us both
in true German fashion; and we will all be so happy! What do you say,
Liebchen? Shall it be so? Will you and Max come with me?”

Ah! wouldn’t they? Here was a Christmas gift indeed,--a home, a
brother! Did ever mortal tree bear so fine a present before? They
embraced Fritz over and over again, Thekla promising between her kisses
to be _such_ a housewife,--so orderly, so busy! Sauer-kraut he should
never be without, nor cabbage soup, nor any thing else that was nice.
And just then something droll happened which Fritz did not see, but
the children did. The door opened gently a little way, and through the
crack appeared the head of December, nodding and winking above the
fallen fir-bough, and beaming with smiles. He pointed to Fritz’s back
and then to the tree, with an “I told you so” air, noiselessly clapped
his hands, and withdrew, just as Fritz shivered, and said, “Bless me,
the wind has blown the door open!”

One week later a large ship weighed anchor in a port, and upon her deck
stood our two children and their new brother. There was no one to see
them go. All their few farewells had been spoken in the distant village
and beside Grandfather’s grave. But as the heavy cables swung and
heaved, and the vessel, released from bondage, moved slowly from the
harbor, upon the slope of a snow-covered hill beneath which she passed,
amid the nodding pines which crowned the top, a group of figures
suddenly appeared. They were the twelve Months come to wave farewell to
the children. There was January, disdainful as ever; sweet, rosy June;
February, his honest nose reddened by the keen wind; May and April,
clasping each other’s waists like a pair of school-girls. When they saw
Max and Thekla on the deck, a little chorus of laughter, exclamation,
and “Good-bys” could be heard. Thekla caught the sound of March’s wild
“Ha! ha!” the rich voice of September; April’s gleeful laugh, as she
flung a handful of violets at the ship, and her sob when they fell,
as of course they did, into the water, and were borne out to sea. A
moment,--no more. The children had time for only one glad smile of
recognition, before the vision vanished and was gone. And no one else
on the deck observed any thing but the sun dancing on the snow, the
dark evergreens, and a few tossing leaves of bright color which still
clung to the bare boughs of an oak-tree.

“Dear, dear Months,--how good they have been to us!” whispered Thekla,
as the hill faded from view.

And the ship spread her white wings, and sailed away to the New World.

[Illustration: “One week later a large ship weighed anchor in a port,
and upon her deck stood our two children,” Max and Thekla.]




Cambridge: Press of John Wilson & Son.




SUSAN COOLIDGE’S POPULAR BOOKS.

[Illustration: ENTERING PARADISE.--PAGE 23. So in they marched, Katy
and Cecy heading the procession, and Dorry, with his great trailing
bunch of boughs, bringing up the rear.]

  WHAT KATY DID. With Illustrations by Addie Ledyard. One handsome,
  square 16mo volume, bound in cloth, black and gilt lettered.
  Price, $1.50.

ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, BOSTON.




SUSAN COOLIDGE’S POPULAR BOOKS.

[Illustration: NANNY’S SUBSTITUTE. Nanny at the Fair, taking orders
and carrying trays.--PAGE 171.]

  MISCHIEF’S THANKSGIVING,
  _AND OTHER STORIES._
  WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY ADDIE LEDYARD.

  _One handsome square 16mo volume, bound in cloth, black and gilt
  lettered. Price $1.50._

ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, BOSTON.




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber’s note:

Spelling and variations in hyphenation have been preserved as they
appear in the original publication. Punctuation has been standardised.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NEW-YEAR'S BARGAIN***


******* This file should be named 58762-0.txt or 58762-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/8/7/6/58762


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

